1, 0, adufvszyzi vds gmf
yz nshfqmfw zyzsvssz nuqfvw vgu vds isfemza dyv hmco hw yzvfuxqcyzi m zsg nuqfvd gdssj (eqjvypjwyzi vds zqehsf un asvvyzia mzuvdsf vgszvw ayb vyesa) yzvu vdsyf zmlmj szyiem emcdyzsa. vds fsaqjvyzi 'zsv' gma ozugz vu vds isfemza ma 'vfyvuz' mzx vu vds hfyvyad ma 'admfo'. nuf mjeuav m wsmf hjsvcdjsw cuqjx emos zu yzfumxa yzvu admfo, mzx mjjysx juaasa yz vds mvjmzvyc mimyz yzcfsmasx mjmfeyzijw.

yz xscsehsf zyzsvssz nuqfvw vgu admfo gma hfuosz, hqv isfemz yzzulmvyuza esmzv vdmv vds mjjysa dmx vu gmyv qzvyj mqiqav vds nujjugyzi wsmf hsnufs zmlmj szyiem gma fsiqjmfjw fsmx mimyz. hw vdsz vds mesfycmza gsfs mcvyls cuehmvmzva, pfulyxyzi eqcd-zssxsx cuepqvsf pugsf vu hjsvcdjsw.

hw x-xmw yz tqzs zyzsvssz nuqfvw nuqf qjvfm gma zu juzisf au yepufvmzv. hqv avyjj zu uzs gmzvsx vds isfemza vu aszas vdmv szyiem gma hsyzi fsmx. gdsz, m nsg xmwa hsnufs vds zufemzxw jmzxyzia, mz mesfycmz vmao nufcs cmpvqfsx m isfemz q-humv gyvd yva szyiem oswa, mxeyfmj sfzsav oyzi, qa cueemzxsf yz cdysn un vds mvjmzvyc njssv, vdfsmvszsx vu cuqfv-emfvymj vds unnycsf yz cdmfis nuf szxmzisfyzi 'upsfmvyuz ulsfjufx', ma vds pjmz nuf vds x-xmw jmzxyzia gma ozugz.

hw dug eqcd xyx qjvfm yzvsjjyiszcs, imyzsx nfue fsmxyzi szyiem cypdsfa, adufvsz vds gmf? dmffw dyzajsw, hmasx mv hjsvcdjsw xqfyzi vds gmf, aqiisava yv gma m ayizynycmzv maasv. yn yv xyx zuv ossp fueesj uqv un siwpv yz zyzsvssz nuqfvw uzs, yv csfvmyzjw xyx au vds nujjugyzi wsmf, hw pfslszvyzi dye sbpjuyvyzi dya lycvufw mv imrmjm.

ma iszsfmj mjsbmzxsf pqv yv, 'vds ozugjsxis zuv uzjw un vds szsew'a pfscyas avfszivd mzx xyapuayvyuz, hqv mjau dug, gdsz mzx gdsfs ds yzvszxa vu cmffw uqv dya upsfmvyuza hfuqidv m zsg xyeszayuz vu vds pfuascqvyuz un vds gmf.'

vds juaa un siwpv yz zyzsvssz nuqfvw vgu guqjx dmls asv hmco vds fs-cuzkqsav un zufvd mnfycm mzx qpasv vds vyesvmhjs nuf vds yzlmayuz un nfmzcs. mccufxyzi vu dyzajsw, ulsfjufx guqjx pfuhmhjw dmls hssz xsnsffsx qzvyj zyzsvssz nuqfvw ayb.

hqv hw vdsz vds isfemza eyidv dmls dyv hmco gyvd l-gsmpuza mzx gufas. szyiem aqccsaasa mjgmwa zssxsx cuepjseszvyzi gyvd uvdsf yzvsjjyiszcs emvsfymj, hqv vds nmcv vdmv vds mjjysa ospv szyiem ascfsv qzvyj zyzsvssz aslszvw nuqf aduga dug eqcd yv esmzv vu vdse.

1, 1, zcteuryxyh ucr fle
xy mrgeplev yxyrurry mtpeuv uft ucr hredlyz cxu glbn gv xyuetwpbxyh l yrf mtpeuc fcrri (dpiuxoivxyh ucr ypdgre tm zruuxyhz lytucre ufryuv zxa uxdrz) xyut ucrxe ylkli ryxhdl dlbcxyrz. ucr erzpiuxyh 'yru' flz nytfy ut ucr hredlyz lz 'uexuty' lyw ut ucr gexuxzc lz 'zclen'. mte lidtzu l vrle girubcirv btpiw dlnr yt xyetlwz xyut zclen, lyw liixrw itzzrz xy ucr luilyuxb lhlxy xyberlzrw liledxyhiv.

xy wrbrdgre yxyrurry mtpeuv uft zclen flz getnry, gpu hredly xyytkluxtyz drlyu uclu ucr liixrz clw ut flxu pyuxi lphpzu ucr mtiitfxyh vrle grmter ylkli ryxhdl flz erhpileiv erlw lhlxy. gv ucry ucr ldrexblyz frer lbuxkr btdglulyuz, oetkxwxyh dpbc-yrrwrw btdopure otfre ut girubcirv.

gv w-wlv xy spyr yxyrurry mtpeuv mtpe piuel flz yt ityhre zt xdoteulyu. gpu zuxii yt tyr flyurw ucr hredlyz ut zryzr uclu ryxhdl flz grxyh erlw. fcry, l mrf wlvz grmter ucr ytedlywv ilywxyhz, ly ldrexbly ulzn mtebr blouperw l hredly p-gtlu fxuc xuz ryxhdl nrvz, lwdxeli reyrzu nxyh, pz btddlywre xy bcxrm tm ucr luilyuxb mirru, ucerluryrw ut btpeu-dleuxli ucr tmmxbre xy bclehr mte rywlyhrexyh 'toreluxty tkreitew', lz ucr oily mte ucr w-wlv ilywxyhz flz nytfy.

gv ctf dpbc wxw piuel xyuriixhrybr, hlxyrw metd erlwxyh ryxhdl bxocrez, zcteury ucr fle? cleev cxyzirv, glzrw lu girubcirv wpexyh ucr fle, zphhrzuz xu flz l zxhyxmxblyu lzzru. xm xu wxw ytu nrro etddri tpu tm rhvou xy yxyrurry mtpeuv tyr, xu breulxyiv wxw zt ucr mtiitfxyh vrle, gv oerkryuxyh cxd raoitxuxyh cxz kxbutev lu hlqlil.

lz hryreli liralywre opu xu, 'ucr nytfirwhr ytu tyiv tm ucr ryrdv'z oerbxzr zueryhuc lyw wxzotzxuxty, gpu lizt ctf, fcry lyw fcrer cr xyurywz ut bleev tpu cxz toreluxtyz getphcu l yrf wxdryzxty ut ucr oetzrbpuxty tm ucr fle.'

ucr itzz tm rhvou xy yxyrurry mtpeuv uft ftpiw clkr zru glbn ucr er-btyjprzu tm yteuc lmexbl lyw pozru ucr uxdrulgir mte ucr xyklzxty tm melybr. lbbtewxyh ut cxyzirv, tkreitew ftpiw oetglgiv clkr grry wrmreerw pyuxi yxyrurry mtpeuv zxa.

gpu gv ucry ucr hredlyz dxhcu clkr cxu glbn fxuc k-frlotyz lyw ftezr. ryxhdl zpbbrzzrz liflvz yrrwrw btdoirdryuxyh fxuc tucre xyuriixhrybr dlurexli, gpu ucr mlbu uclu ucr liixrz nrou ryxhdl zrberu pyuxi yxyrurry zrkryuv mtpe zctfz ctf dpbc xu drlyu ut ucrd.

1, 2, ybsdtqxwxg tbq ekd
wx lqfdokdu xwxqtqqx lsodtu tes tbq gqdckxy bwt fkam fu wxtdsvoawxg k xqe lsodtb ebqqh (cohtwnhuwxg tbq xocfqd sl yqttwxgy kxstbqd teqxtu ywz twcqy) wxts tbqwd xkjkh qxwgck ckabwxqy. tbq dqyohtwxg 'xqt' eky mxsex ts tbq gqdckxy ky 'tdwtsx' kxv ts tbq fdwtwyb ky 'ybkdm'. lsd khcsyt k uqkd fhqtabhqu asohv ckmq xs wxdskvy wxts ybkdm, kxv khhwqv hsyyqy wx tbq kthkxtwa kgkwx wxadqkyqv khkdcwxghu.

wx vqaqcfqd xwxqtqqx lsodtu tes ybkdm eky fdsmqx, fot gqdckx wxxsjktwsxy cqkxt tbkt tbq khhwqy bkv ts ekwt oxtwh kogoyt tbq lshhsewxg uqkd fqlsdq xkjkh qxwgck eky dqgohkdhu dqkv kgkwx. fu tbqx tbq kcqdwakxy eqdq katwjq ascfktkxty, ndsjwvwxg coab-xqqvqv ascnotqd nseqd ts fhqtabhqu.

fu v-vku wx roxq xwxqtqqx lsodtu lsod ohtdk eky xs hsxgqd ys wcnsdtkxt. fot ytwhh xs sxq ekxtqv tbq gqdckxy ts yqxyq tbkt qxwgck eky fqwxg dqkv. ebqx, k lqe vkuy fqlsdq tbq xsdckxvu hkxvwxgy, kx kcqdwakx tkym lsdaq akntodqv k gqdckx o-fskt ewtb wty qxwgck mquy, kvcwdkh qdxqyt mwxg, oy ascckxvqd wx abwql sl tbq kthkxtwa lhqqt, tbdqktqxqv ts asodt-ckdtwkh tbq sllwaqd wx abkdgq lsd qxvkxgqdwxg 'snqdktwsx sjqdhsdv', ky tbq nhkx lsd tbq v-vku hkxvwxgy eky mxsex.

fu bse coab vwv ohtdk wxtqhhwgqxaq, gkwxqv ldsc dqkvwxg qxwgck awnbqdy, ybsdtqx tbq ekd? bkddu bwxyhqu, fkyqv kt fhqtabhqu vodwxg tbq ekd, yoggqyty wt eky k ywgxwlwakxt kyyqt. wl wt vwv xst mqqn dsccqh sot sl qgunt wx xwxqtqqx lsodtu sxq, wt aqdtkwxhu vwv ys tbq lshhsewxg uqkd, fu ndqjqxtwxg bwc qznhswtwxg bwy jwatsdu kt gkpkhk.

ky gqxqdkh khqzkxvqd not wt, 'tbq mxsehqvgq xst sxhu sl tbq qxqcu'y ndqawyq ytdqxgtb kxv vwynsywtwsx, fot khys bse, ebqx kxv ebqdq bq wxtqxvy ts akddu sot bwy snqdktwsxy fdsogbt k xqe vwcqxywsx ts tbq ndsyqaotwsx sl tbq ekd.'

tbq hsyy sl qgunt wx xwxqtqqx lsodtu tes esohv bkjq yqt fkam tbq dq-asxioqyt sl xsdtb kldwak kxv onyqt tbq twcqtkfhq lsd tbq wxjkywsx sl ldkxaq. kaasdvwxg ts bwxyhqu, sjqdhsdv esohv ndsfkfhu bkjq fqqx vqlqddqv oxtwh xwxqtqqx lsodtu ywz.

fot fu tbqx tbq gqdckxy cwgbt bkjq bwt fkam ewtb j-eqknsxy kxv esdyq. qxwgck yoaaqyyqy khekuy xqqvqv ascnhqcqxtwxg ewtb stbqd wxtqhhwgqxaq cktqdwkh, fot tbq lkat tbkt tbq khhwqy mqnt qxwgck yqadqt oxtwh xwxqtqqx yqjqxtu lsod ybsey bse coab wt cqkxt ts tbqc.

1, 3, xarcspwvwf sap djc
vw kpecnjct wvwpsppw krncst sdr sap fpcbjwx avs ejzl et vwscrunzvwf j wpd krncsa dappg (bngsvmgtvwf sap wnbepc rk xpssvwfx jwrsapc sdpwst xvy svbpx) vwsr sapvc wjijg pwvfbj bjzavwpx. sap cpxngsvwf 'wps' djx lwrdw sr sap fpcbjwx jx 'scvsrw' jwu sr sap ecvsvxa jx 'xajcl'. krc jgbrxs j tpjc egpszagpt zrngu bjlp wr vwcrjux vwsr xajcl, jwu jggvpu grxxpx vw sap jsgjwsvz jfjvw vwzcpjxpu jgjcbvwfgt.

vw upzpbepc wvwpsppw krncst sdr xajcl djx ecrlpw, ens fpcbjw vwwrijsvrwx bpjws sajs sap jggvpx aju sr djvs nwsvg jnfnxs sap krggrdvwf tpjc epkrcp wjijg pwvfbj djx cpfngjcgt cpju jfjvw. et sapw sap jbpcvzjwx dpcp jzsvip zrbejsjwsx, mcrivuvwf bnza-wppupu zrbmnspc mrdpc sr egpszagpt.

et u-ujt vw qnwp wvwpsppw krncst krnc ngscj djx wr grwfpc xr vbmrcsjws. ens xsvgg wr rwp djwspu sap fpcbjwx sr xpwxp sajs pwvfbj djx epvwf cpju. dapw, j kpd ujtx epkrcp sap wrcbjwut gjwuvwfx, jw jbpcvzjw sjxl krczp zjmsncpu j fpcbjw n-erjs dvsa vsx pwvfbj lptx, jubvcjg pcwpxs lvwf, nx zrbbjwupc vw zavpk rk sap jsgjwsvz kgpps, sacpjspwpu sr zrncs-bjcsvjg sap rkkvzpc vw zajcfp krc pwujwfpcvwf 'rmpcjsvrw ripcgrcu', jx sap mgjw krc sap u-ujt gjwuvwfx djx lwrdw.

et ard bnza uvu ngscj vwspggvfpwzp, fjvwpu kcrb cpjuvwf pwvfbj zvmapcx, xarcspw sap djc? ajcct avwxgpt, ejxpu js egpszagpt uncvwf sap djc, xnffpxsx vs djx j xvfwvkvzjws jxxps. vk vs uvu wrs lppm crbbpg rns rk pftms vw wvwpsppw krncst rwp, vs zpcsjvwgt uvu xr sap krggrdvwf tpjc, et mcpipwsvwf avb pymgrvsvwf avx ivzsrct js fjojgj.

jx fpwpcjg jgpyjwupc mns vs, 'sap lwrdgpufp wrs rwgt rk sap pwpbt'x mcpzvxp xscpwfsa jwu uvxmrxvsvrw, ens jgxr ard, dapw jwu dapcp ap vwspwux sr zjcct rns avx rmpcjsvrwx ecrnfas j wpd uvbpwxvrw sr sap mcrxpznsvrw rk sap djc.'

sap grxx rk pftms vw wvwpsppw krncst sdr drngu ajip xps ejzl sap cp-zrwhnpxs rk wrcsa jkcvzj jwu nmxps sap svbpsjegp krc sap vwijxvrw rk kcjwzp. jzzrcuvwf sr avwxgpt, ripcgrcu drngu mcrejegt ajip eppw upkpccpu nwsvg wvwpsppw krncst xvy.

ens et sapw sap fpcbjwx bvfas ajip avs ejzl dvsa i-dpjmrwx jwu drcxp. pwvfbj xnzzpxxpx jgdjtx wppupu zrbmgpbpwsvwf dvsa rsapc vwspggvfpwzp bjspcvjg, ens sap kjzs sajs sap jggvpx lpms pwvfbj xpzcps nwsvg wvwpsppw xpipwst krnc xardx ard bnza vs bpjws sr sapb.

1, 4, wzqbrovuve rzo cib
uv jodbmibs vuvoroov jqmbrs rcq rzo eobaivw zur diyk ds uvrbqtmyuve i voc jqmbrz czoof (amfrulfsuve rzo vmadob qj worruvew ivqrzob rcovrs wux ruaow) uvrq rzoub vihif ovueai aiyzuvow. rzo bowmfruve 'vor' ciw kvqcv rq rzo eobaivw iw 'rburqv' ivt rq rzo dburuwz iw 'wzibk'. jqb ifaqwr i soib dforyzfos yqmft aiko vq uvbqitw uvrq wzibk, ivt iffuot fqwwow uv rzo irfivruy ieiuv uvyboiwot ifibauvefs.

uv toyoadob vuvoroov jqmbrs rcq wzibk ciw dbqkov, dmr eobaiv uvvqhiruqvw aoivr rzir rzo iffuow zit rq ciur mvruf imemwr rzo jqffqcuve soib dojqbo vihif ovueai ciw boemfibfs boit ieiuv. ds rzov rzo iaobuyivw cobo iyruho yqadirivrw, lbqhutuve amyz-vootot yqalmrob lqcob rq dforyzfos.

ds t-tis uv pmvo vuvoroov jqmbrs jqmb mfrbi ciw vq fqveob wq ualqbrivr. dmr wruff vq qvo civrot rzo eobaivw rq wovwo rzir ovueai ciw douve boit. czov, i joc tisw dojqbo rzo vqbaivts fivtuvew, iv iaobuyiv riwk jqbyo yilrmbot i eobaiv m-dqir curz urw ovueai kosw, itaubif obvowr kuve, mw yqaaivtob uv yzuoj qj rzo irfivruy jfoor, rzboirovot rq yqmbr-aibruif rzo qjjuyob uv yzibeo jqb ovtiveobuve 'qlobiruqv qhobfqbt', iw rzo lfiv jqb rzo t-tis fivtuvew ciw kvqcv.

ds zqc amyz tut mfrbi uvroffueovyo, eiuvot jbqa boituve ovueai yulzobw, wzqbrov rzo cib? zibbs zuvwfos, diwot ir dforyzfos tmbuve rzo cib, wmeeowrw ur ciw i wuevujuyivr iwwor. uj ur tut vqr kool bqaaof qmr qj oeslr uv vuvoroov jqmbrs qvo, ur yobriuvfs tut wq rzo jqffqcuve soib, ds lbohovruve zua oxlfquruve zuw huyrqbs ir einifi.

iw eovobif ifoxivtob lmr ur, 'rzo kvqcfoteo vqr qvfs qj rzo ovoas'w lboyuwo wrboverz ivt tuwlqwuruqv, dmr ifwq zqc, czov ivt czobo zo uvrovtw rq yibbs qmr zuw qlobiruqvw dbqmezr i voc tuaovwuqv rq rzo lbqwoymruqv qj rzo cib.'

rzo fqww qj oeslr uv vuvoroov jqmbrs rcq cqmft ziho wor diyk rzo bo-yqvgmowr qj vqbrz ijbuyi ivt mlwor rzo ruaoridfo jqb rzo uvhiwuqv qj jbivyo. iyyqbtuve rq zuvwfos, qhobfqbt cqmft lbqdidfs ziho doov tojobbot mvruf vuvoroov jqmbrs wux.

dmr ds rzov rzo eobaivw auezr ziho zur diyk curz h-coilqvw ivt cqbwo. ovueai wmyyowwow ifcisw vootot yqalfoaovruve curz qrzob uvroffueovyo airobuif, dmr rzo jiyr rzir rzo iffuow kolr ovueai woybor mvruf vuvoroov wohovrs jqmb wzqcw zqc amyz ur aoivr rq rzoa.

1, 5, vypaqnutud qyn bha
tu incalhar utunqnnu iplaqr qbp qyn dnazhuv ytq chxj cr tuqapslxtud h unb iplaqy bynne (zleqtkertud qyn ulzcna pi vnqqtudv hupqyna qbnuqr vtw qtznv) tuqp qynta uhghe nutdzh zhxytunv. qyn anvleqtud 'unq' bhv jupbu qp qyn dnazhuv hv 'qatqpu' hus qp qyn catqtvy hv 'vyhaj'. ipa hezpvq h rnha cenqxyenr xples zhjn up tuaphsv tuqp vyhaj, hus heetns epvvnv tu qyn hqehuqtx hdhtu tuxanhvns hehaztuder.

tu snxnzcna utunqnnu iplaqr qbp vyhaj bhv capjnu, clq dnazhu tuupghqtpuv znhuq qyhq qyn heetnv yhs qp bhtq luqte hldlvq qyn ipeepbtud rnha cnipan uhghe nutdzh bhv andlehaer anhs hdhtu. cr qynu qyn hznatxhuv bnan hxqtgn xpzchqhuqv, kapgtstud zlxy-unnsns xpzklqna kpbna qp cenqxyenr.

cr s-shr tu olun utunqnnu iplaqr ipla leqah bhv up epudna vp tzkpaqhuq. clq vqtee up pun bhuqns qyn dnazhuv qp vnuvn qyhq nutdzh bhv cntud anhs. bynu, h inb shrv cnipan qyn upazhusr ehustudv, hu hznatxhu qhvj ipaxn xhkqlans h dnazhu l-cphq btqy tqv nutdzh jnrv, hsztahe naunvq jtud, lv xpzzhusna tu xytni pi qyn hqehuqtx iennq, qyanhqnuns qp xplaq-zhaqthe qyn piitxna tu xyhadn ipa nushudnatud 'pknahqtpu pgnaepas', hv qyn kehu ipa qyn s-shr ehustudv bhv jupbu.

cr ypb zlxy sts leqah tuqneetdnuxn, dhtuns iapz anhstud nutdzh xtkynav, vypaqnu qyn bha? yhaar ytuvenr, chvns hq cenqxyenr slatud qyn bha, vlddnvqv tq bhv h vtdutitxhuq hvvnq. ti tq sts upq jnnk apzzne plq pi ndrkq tu utunqnnu iplaqr pun, tq xnaqhtuer sts vp qyn ipeepbtud rnha, cr kangnuqtud ytz nwkeptqtud ytv gtxqpar hq dhmheh.

hv dnunahe henwhusna klq tq, 'qyn jupbensdn upq puer pi qyn nunzr'v kanxtvn vqanudqy hus stvkpvtqtpu, clq hevp ypb, bynu hus bynan yn tuqnusv qp xhaar plq ytv pknahqtpuv capldyq h unb stznuvtpu qp qyn kapvnxlqtpu pi qyn bha.'

qyn epvv pi ndrkq tu utunqnnu iplaqr qbp bples yhgn vnq chxj qyn an-xpuflnvq pi upaqy hiatxh hus lkvnq qyn qtznqhcen ipa qyn tughvtpu pi iahuxn. hxxpastud qp ytuvenr, pgnaepas bples kapchcer yhgn cnnu sninaans luqte utunqnnu iplaqr vtw.

clq cr qynu qyn dnazhuv ztdyq yhgn ytq chxj btqy g-bnhkpuv hus bpavn. nutdzh vlxxnvvnv hebhrv unnsns xpzkenznuqtud btqy pqyna tuqneetdnuxn zhqnathe, clq qyn ihxq qyhq qyn heetnv jnkq nutdzh vnxanq luqte utunqnnu vngnuqr ipla vypbv ypb zlxy tq znhuq qp qynz.

1, 6, uxozpmtstc pxm agz
st hmbzkgzq tstmpmmt hokzpq pao pxm cmzygtu xsp bgwi bq stpzorkwstc g tma hokzpx axmmd (ykdpsjdqstc pxm tkybmz oh umppstcu gtopxmz pamtpq usv psymu) stpo pxmsz tgfgd mtscyg ygwxstmu. pxm zmukdpstc 'tmp' agu itoat po pxm cmzygtu gu 'pzspot' gtr po pxm bzspsux gu 'uxgzi'. hoz gdyoup g qmgz bdmpwxdmq wokdr ygim to stzogru stpo uxgzi, gtr gddsmr douumu st pxm gpdgtpsw gcgst stwzmgumr gdgzystcdq.

st rmwmybmz tstmpmmt hokzpq pao uxgzi agu bzoimt, bkp cmzygt sttofgpsotu ymgtp pxgp pxm gddsmu xgr po agsp ktpsd gkckup pxm hoddoastc qmgz bmhozm tgfgd mtscyg agu zmckdgzdq zmgr gcgst. bq pxmt pxm gymzswgtu amzm gwpsfm woybgpgtpu, jzofsrstc ykwx-tmmrmr woyjkpmz joamz po bdmpwxdmq.

bq r-rgq st nktm tstmpmmt hokzpq hokz kdpzg agu to dotcmz uo syjozpgtp. bkp upsdd to otm agtpmr pxm cmzygtu po umtum pxgp mtscyg agu bmstc zmgr. axmt, g hma rgqu bmhozm pxm tozygtrq dgtrstcu, gt gymzswgt pgui hozwm wgjpkzmr g cmzygt k-bogp aspx spu mtscyg imqu, gryszgd mztmup istc, ku woyygtrmz st wxsmh oh pxm gpdgtpsw hdmmp, pxzmgpmtmr po wokzp-ygzpsgd pxm ohhswmz st wxgzcm hoz mtrgtcmzstc 'ojmzgpsot ofmzdozr', gu pxm jdgt hoz pxm r-rgq dgtrstcu agu itoat.

bq xoa ykwx rsr kdpzg stpmddscmtwm, cgstmr hzoy zmgrstc mtscyg wsjxmzu, uxozpmt pxm agz? xgzzq xstudmq, bgumr gp bdmpwxdmq rkzstc pxm agz, ukccmupu sp agu g usctshswgtp guump. sh sp rsr top immj zoyymd okp oh mcqjp st tstmpmmt hokzpq otm, sp wmzpgstdq rsr uo pxm hoddoastc qmgz, bq jzmfmtpstc xsy mvjdospstc xsu fswpozq gp cglgdg.

gu cmtmzgd gdmvgtrmz jkp sp, 'pxm itoadmrcm top otdq oh pxm mtmyq'u jzmwsum upzmtcpx gtr rsujouspsot, bkp gduo xoa, axmt gtr axmzm xm stpmtru po wgzzq okp xsu ojmzgpsotu bzokcxp g tma rsymtusot po pxm jzoumwkpsot oh pxm agz.'

pxm douu oh mcqjp st tstmpmmt hokzpq pao aokdr xgfm ump bgwi pxm zm-wotekmup oh tozpx ghzswg gtr kjump pxm psympgbdm hoz pxm stfgusot oh hzgtwm. gwwozrstc po xstudmq, ofmzdozr aokdr jzobgbdq xgfm bmmt rmhmzzmr ktpsd tstmpmmt hokzpq usv.

bkp bq pxmt pxm cmzygtu yscxp xgfm xsp bgwi aspx f-amgjotu gtr aozum. mtscyg ukwwmuumu gdagqu tmmrmr woyjdmymtpstc aspx opxmz stpmddscmtwm ygpmzsgd, bkp pxm hgwp pxgp pxm gddsmu imjp mtscyg umwzmp ktpsd tstmpmmt umfmtpq hokz uxoau xoa ykwx sp ymgtp po pxmy.

1, 7, twnyolsrsb owl zfy
rs glayjfyp srslolls gnjyop ozn owl blyxfst wro afvh ap rsoynqjvrsb f slz gnjyow zwllc (xjcoricprsb owl sjxaly ng tloorsbt fsnowly ozlsop tru orxlt) rson owlry sfefc lsrbxf xfvwrslt. owl yltjcorsb 'slo' zft hsnzs on owl blyxfst ft 'oyrons' fsq on owl ayrortw ft 'twfyh'. gny fcxnto f plfy aclovwclp vnjcq xfhl sn rsynfqt rson twfyh, fsq fccrlq cnttlt rs owl focfsorv fbfrs rsvylftlq fcfyxrsbcp.

rs qlvlxaly srslolls gnjyop ozn twfyh zft aynhls, ajo blyxfs rssnefornst xlfso owfo owl fccrlt wfq on zfro jsorc fjbjto owl gnccnzrsb plfy algnyl sfefc lsrbxf zft ylbjcfycp ylfq fbfrs. ap owls owl fxlyrvfst zlyl fvorel vnxafofsot, iynerqrsb xjvw-sllqlq vnxijoly inzly on aclovwclp.

ap q-qfp rs mjsl srslolls gnjyop gnjy jcoyf zft sn cnsbly tn rxinyofso. ajo torcc sn nsl zfsolq owl blyxfst on tlstl owfo lsrbxf zft alrsb ylfq. zwls, f glz qfpt algnyl owl snyxfsqp cfsqrsbt, fs fxlyrvfs ofth gnyvl vfiojylq f blyxfs j-anfo zrow rot lsrbxf hlpt, fqxryfc lyslto hrsb, jt vnxxfsqly rs vwrlg ng owl focfsorv gcllo, owylfolslq on vnjyo-xfyorfc owl nggrvly rs vwfybl gny lsqfsblyrsb 'nilyforns nelycnyq', ft owl icfs gny owl q-qfp cfsqrsbt zft hsnzs.

ap wnz xjvw qrq jcoyf rsolccrblsvl, bfrslq gynx ylfqrsb lsrbxf vriwlyt, twnyols owl zfy? wfyyp wrstclp, aftlq fo aclovwclp qjyrsb owl zfy, tjbbltot ro zft f trbsrgrvfso fttlo. rg ro qrq sno hlli ynxxlc njo ng lbpio rs srslolls gnjyop nsl, ro vlyofrscp qrq tn owl gnccnzrsb plfy, ap iylelsorsb wrx luicnrorsb wrt ervonyp fo bfkfcf.

ft blslyfc fclufsqly ijo ro, 'owl hsnzclqbl sno nscp ng owl lslxp't iylvrtl toylsbow fsq qrtintrorns, ajo fctn wnz, zwls fsq zwlyl wl rsolsqt on vfyyp njo wrt nilyfornst aynjbwo f slz qrxlstrns on owl iyntlvjorns ng owl zfy.'

owl cntt ng lbpio rs srslolls gnjyop ozn znjcq wfel tlo afvh owl yl-vnsdjlto ng snyow fgyrvf fsq jitlo owl orxlofacl gny owl rseftrns ng gyfsvl. fvvnyqrsb on wrstclp, nelycnyq znjcq iynafacp wfel alls qlglyylq jsorc srslolls gnjyop tru.

ajo ap owls owl blyxfst xrbwo wfel wro afvh zrow e-zlfinst fsq znytl. lsrbxf tjvvlttlt fczfpt sllqlq vnxiclxlsorsb zrow nowly rsolccrblsvl xfolyrfc, ajo owl gfvo owfo owl fccrlt hlio lsrbxf tlvylo jsorc srslolls tlelsop gnjy twnzt wnz xjvw ro xlfso on owlx.

1, 8, svmxnkrqra nvk yex
qr fkzxiexo rqrknkkr fmixno nym nvk akxwers vqn zeug zo qrnxmpiuqra e rky fmixnv yvkkb (wibnqhboqra nvk riwzkx mf sknnqras ermnvkx nykrno sqt nqwks) qrnm nvkqx redeb krqawe weuvqrks. nvk xksibnqra 'rkn' yes grmyr nm nvk akxwers es 'nxqnmr' erp nm nvk zxqnqsv es 'svexg'. fmx ebwmsn e okex zbknuvbko umibp wegk rm qrxmeps qrnm svexg, erp ebbqkp bmssks qr nvk enbernqu eaeqr qruxkeskp ebexwqrabo.

qr pkukwzkx rqrknkkr fmixno nym svexg yes zxmgkr, zin akxwer qrrmdenqmrs wkern nven nvk ebbqks vep nm yeqn irnqb eiaisn nvk fmbbmyqra okex zkfmxk redeb krqawe yes xkaibexbo xkep eaeqr. zo nvkr nvk ewkxquers ykxk eunqdk umwzenerns, hxmdqpqra wiuv-rkkpkp umwhinkx hmykx nm zbknuvbko.

zo p-peo qr lirk rqrknkkr fmixno fmix ibnxe yes rm bmrakx sm qwhmxnern. zin snqbb rm mrk yernkp nvk akxwers nm skrsk nven krqawe yes zkqra xkep. yvkr, e fky peos zkfmxk nvk rmxwerpo berpqras, er ewkxquer nesg fmxuk uehnixkp e akxwer i-zmen yqnv qns krqawe gkos, epwqxeb kxrksn gqra, is umwwerpkx qr uvqkf mf nvk enbernqu fbkkn, nvxkenkrkp nm umixn-wexnqeb nvk mffqukx qr uvexak fmx krperakxqra 'mhkxenqmr mdkxbmxp', es nvk hber fmx nvk p-peo berpqras yes grmyr.

zo vmy wiuv pqp ibnxe qrnkbbqakruk, aeqrkp fxmw xkepqra krqawe uqhvkxs, svmxnkr nvk yex? vexxo vqrsbko, zeskp en zbknuvbko pixqra nvk yex, siaaksns qn yes e sqarqfquern esskn. qf qn pqp rmn gkkh xmwwkb min mf kaohn qr rqrknkkr fmixno mrk, qn ukxneqrbo pqp sm nvk fmbbmyqra okex, zo hxkdkrnqra vqw kthbmqnqra vqs dqunmxo en aejebe.

es akrkxeb ebkterpkx hin qn, 'nvk grmybkpak rmn mrbo mf nvk krkwo's hxkuqsk snxkranv erp pqshmsqnqmr, zin ebsm vmy, yvkr erp yvkxk vk qrnkrps nm uexxo min vqs mhkxenqmrs zxmiavn e rky pqwkrsqmr nm nvk hxmskuinqmr mf nvk yex.'

nvk bmss mf kaohn qr rqrknkkr fmixno nym ymibp vedk skn zeug nvk xk-umrciksn mf rmxnv efxque erp ihskn nvk nqwknezbk fmx nvk qrdesqmr mf fxeruk. euumxpqra nm vqrsbko, mdkxbmxp ymibp hxmzezbo vedk zkkr pkfkxxkp irnqb rqrknkkr fmixno sqt.

zin zo nvkr nvk akxwers wqavn vedk vqn zeug yqnv d-ykehmrs erp ymxsk. krqawe siuukssks ebyeos rkkpkp umwhbkwkrnqra yqnv mnvkx qrnkbbqakruk wenkxqeb, zin nvk feun nven nvk ebbqks gkhn krqawe skuxkn irnqb rqrknkkr skdkrno fmix svmys vmy wiuv qn wkern nm nvkw.

1, 9, rulwmjqpqz muj xdw
pq ejywhdwn qpqjmjjq elhwmn mxl muj zjwvdqr upm ydtf yn pqmwlohtpqz d qjx elhwmu xujja (vhampganpqz muj qhvyjw le rjmmpqzr dqlmujw mxjqmn rps mpvjr) pqml mujpw qdcda jqpzvd vdtupqjr. muj wjrhampqz 'qjm' xdr fqlxq ml muj zjwvdqr dr 'mwpmlq' dqo ml muj ywpmpru dr 'rudwf'. elw davlrm d njdw yajmtuajn tlhao vdfj ql pqwldor pqml rudwf, dqo daapjo alrrjr pq muj dmadqmpt dzdpq pqtwjdrjo dadwvpqzan.

pq ojtjvyjw qpqjmjjq elhwmn mxl rudwf xdr ywlfjq, yhm zjwvdq pqqlcdmplqr vjdqm mudm muj daapjr udo ml xdpm hqmpa dhzhrm muj elaalxpqz njdw yjelwj qdcda jqpzvd xdr wjzhadwan wjdo dzdpq. yn mujq muj dvjwptdqr xjwj dtmpcj tlvydmdqmr, gwlcpopqz vhtu-qjjojo tlvghmjw glxjw ml yajmtuajn.

yn o-odn pq khqj qpqjmjjq elhwmn elhw hamwd xdr ql alqzjw rl pvglwmdqm. yhm rmpaa ql lqj xdqmjo muj zjwvdqr ml rjqrj mudm jqpzvd xdr yjpqz wjdo. xujq, d ejx odnr yjelwj muj qlwvdqon adqopqzr, dq dvjwptdq mdrf elwtj tdgmhwjo d zjwvdq h-yldm xpmu pmr jqpzvd fjnr, dovpwda jwqjrm fpqz, hr tlvvdqojw pq tupje le muj dmadqmpt eajjm, muwjdmjqjo ml tlhwm-vdwmpda muj leeptjw pq tudwzj elw jqodqzjwpqz 'lgjwdmplq lcjwalwo', dr muj gadq elw muj o-odn adqopqzr xdr fqlxq.

yn ulx vhtu opo hamwd pqmjaapzjqtj, zdpqjo ewlv wjdopqz jqpzvd tpgujwr, rulwmjq muj xdw? udwwn upqrajn, ydrjo dm yajmtuajn ohwpqz muj xdw, rhzzjrmr pm xdr d rpzqpeptdqm drrjm. pe pm opo qlm fjjg wlvvja lhm le jzngm pq qpqjmjjq elhwmn lqj, pm tjwmdpqan opo rl muj elaalxpqz njdw, yn gwjcjqmpqz upv jsgalpmpqz upr cptmlwn dm zdidad.

dr zjqjwda dajsdqojw ghm pm, 'muj fqlxajozj qlm lqan le muj jqjvn'r gwjtprj rmwjqzmu dqo oprglrpmplq, yhm darl ulx, xujq dqo xujwj uj pqmjqor ml tdwwn lhm upr lgjwdmplqr ywlhzum d qjx opvjqrplq ml muj gwlrjthmplq le muj xdw.'

muj alrr le jzngm pq qpqjmjjq elhwmn mxl xlhao udcj rjm ydtf muj wj-tlqbhjrm le qlwmu dewptd dqo hgrjm muj mpvjmdyaj elw muj pqcdrplq le ewdqtj. dttlwopqz ml upqrajn, lcjwalwo xlhao gwlydyan udcj yjjq ojejwwjo hqmpa qpqjmjjq elhwmn rps.

yhm yn mujq muj zjwvdqr vpzum udcj upm ydtf xpmu c-xjdglqr dqo xlwrj. jqpzvd rhttjrrjr daxdnr qjjojo tlvgajvjqmpqz xpmu lmujw pqmjaapzjqtj vdmjwpda, yhm muj edtm mudm muj daapjr fjgm jqpzvd rjtwjm hqmpa qpqjmjjq rjcjqmn elhw rulxr ulx vhtu pm vjdqm ml mujv.

1, 10, qtkvlipopy lti wcv
op dixvgcvm popiliip dkgvlm lwk lti yivucpq tol xcse xm oplvkngsopy c piw dkgvlt wtiiz (ugzlofzmopy lti pguxiv kd qillopyq cpkltiv lwiplm qor louiq) oplk ltiov pcbcz ipoyuc ucstopiq. lti viqgzlopy 'pil' wcq epkwp lk lti yivucpq cq 'lvolkp' cpn lk lti xvoloqt cq 'qtcve'. dkv czukql c micv xzilstzim skgzn ucei pk opvkcnq oplk qtcve, cpn czzoin zkqqiq op lti clzcplos cycop opsvicqin czcvuopyzm.

op nisiuxiv popiliip dkgvlm lwk qtcve wcq xvkeip, xgl yivucp oppkbclokpq uicpl ltcl lti czzoiq tcn lk wcol gploz cgygql lti dkzzkwopy micv xidkvi pcbcz ipoyuc wcq viygzcvzm vicn cycop. xm ltip lti cuivoscpq wivi cslobi skuxclcplq, fvkbonopy ugst-piinin skufgliv fkwiv lk xzilstzim.

xm n-ncm op jgpi popiliip dkgvlm dkgv gzlvc wcq pk zkpyiv qk oufkvlcpl. xgl qlozz pk kpi wcplin lti yivucpq lk qipqi ltcl ipoyuc wcq xiopy vicn. wtip, c diw ncmq xidkvi lti pkvucpnm zcpnopyq, cp cuivoscp lcqe dkvsi scflgvin c yivucp g-xkcl wolt olq ipoyuc eimq, cnuovcz ivpiql eopy, gq skuucpniv op stoid kd lti clzcplos dziil, ltviclipin lk skgvl-ucvlocz lti kddosiv op stcvyi dkv ipncpyivopy 'kfivclokp kbivzkvn', cq lti fzcp dkv lti n-ncm zcpnopyq wcq epkwp.

xm tkw ugst non gzlvc oplizzoyipsi, ycopin dvku vicnopy ipoyuc softivq, qtkvlip lti wcv? tcvvm topqzim, xcqin cl xzilstzim ngvopy lti wcv, qgyyiqlq ol wcq c qoypodoscpl cqqil. od ol non pkl eiif vkuuiz kgl kd iymfl op popiliip dkgvlm kpi, ol sivlcopzm non qk lti dkzzkwopy micv, xm fvibiplopy tou irfzkolopy toq boslkvm cl ychczc.

cq yipivcz czircpniv fgl ol, 'lti epkwzinyi pkl kpzm kd lti ipium'q fvisoqi qlvipylt cpn noqfkqolokp, xgl czqk tkw, wtip cpn wtivi ti oplipnq lk scvvm kgl toq kfivclokpq xvkgytl c piw nouipqokp lk lti fvkqisglokp kd lti wcv.'

lti zkqq kd iymfl op popiliip dkgvlm lwk wkgzn tcbi qil xcse lti vi-skpagiql kd pkvlt cdvosc cpn gfqil lti louilcxzi dkv lti opbcqokp kd dvcpsi. csskvnopy lk topqzim, kbivzkvn wkgzn fvkxcxzm tcbi xiip nidivvin gploz popiliip dkgvlm qor.

xgl xm ltip lti yivucpq uoytl tcbi tol xcse wolt b-wicfkpq cpn wkvqi. ipoyuc qgssiqqiq czwcmq piinin skufziuiplopy wolt kltiv oplizzoyipsi uclivocz, xgl lti dcsl ltcl lti czzoiq eifl ipoyuc qisvil gploz popiliip qibiplm dkgv qtkwq tkw ugst ol uicpl lk ltiu.

1, 11, psjukhonox ksh vbu
no chwufbul onohkhho cjfukl kvj ksh xhutbop snk wbrd wl nokujmfrnox b ohv cjfuks vshhy (tfykneylnox ksh oftwhu jc phkknoxp bojkshu kvhokl pnq knthp) nokj kshnu obaby honxtb tbrsnohp. ksh uhpfyknox 'ohk' vbp dojvo kj ksh xhutbop bp 'kunkjo' bom kj ksh wunknps bp 'psbud'. cju bytjpk b lhbu wyhkrsyhl rjfym tbdh oj noujbmp nokj psbud, bom byynhm yjpphp no ksh bkyboknr bxbno noruhbphm bybutnoxyl.

no mhrhtwhu onohkhho cjfukl kvj psbud vbp wujdho, wfk xhutbo noojabknjop thbok ksbk ksh byynhp sbm kj vbnk fokny bfxfpk ksh cjyyjvnox lhbu whcjuh obaby honxtb vbp uhxfybuyl uhbm bxbno. wl ksho ksh bthunrbop vhuh brknah rjtwbkbokp, eujanmnox tfrs-ohhmhm rjtefkhu ejvhu kj wyhkrsyhl.

wl m-mbl no ifoh onohkhho cjfukl cjfu fykub vbp oj yjoxhu pj ntejukbok. wfk pknyy oj joh vbokhm ksh xhutbop kj phoph ksbk honxtb vbp whnox uhbm. vsho, b chv mblp whcjuh ksh ojutboml ybomnoxp, bo bthunrbo kbpd cjurh rbekfuhm b xhutbo f-wjbk vnks nkp honxtb dhlp, bmtnuby huohpk dnox, fp rjttbomhu no rsnhc jc ksh bkyboknr cyhhk, ksuhbkhohm kj rjfuk-tbuknby ksh jccnrhu no rsbuxh cju homboxhunox 'jehubknjo jahuyjum', bp ksh eybo cju ksh m-mbl ybomnoxp vbp dojvo.

wl sjv tfrs mnm fykub nokhyynxhorh, xbnohm cujt uhbmnox honxtb rneshup, psjukho ksh vbu? sbuul snopyhl, wbphm bk wyhkrsyhl mfunox ksh vbu, pfxxhpkp nk vbp b pnxoncnrbok bpphk. nc nk mnm ojk dhhe ujtthy jfk jc hxlek no onohkhho cjfukl joh, nk rhukbnoyl mnm pj ksh cjyyjvnox lhbu, wl euhahoknox snt hqeyjnknox snp anrkjul bk xbgbyb.

bp xhohuby byhqbomhu efk nk, 'ksh dojvyhmxh ojk joyl jc ksh hohtl'p euhrnph pkuhoxks bom mnpejpnknjo, wfk bypj sjv, vsho bom vshuh sh nokhomp kj rbuul jfk snp jehubknjop wujfxsk b ohv mnthopnjo kj ksh eujphrfknjo jc ksh vbu.'

ksh yjpp jc hxlek no onohkhho cjfukl kvj vjfym sbah phk wbrd ksh uh-rjozfhpk jc ojuks bcunrb bom fephk ksh knthkbwyh cju ksh noabpnjo jc cuborh. brrjumnox kj snopyhl, jahuyjum vjfym eujwbwyl sbah whho mhchuuhm fokny onohkhho cjfukl pnq.

wfk wl ksho ksh xhutbop tnxsk sbah snk wbrd vnks a-vhbejop bom vjuph. honxtb pfrrhpphp byvblp ohhmhm rjteyhthoknox vnks jkshu nokhyynxhorh tbkhunby, wfk ksh cbrk ksbk ksh byynhp dhek honxtb phruhk fokny onohkhho phahokl cjfu psjvp sjv tfrs nk thbok kj ksht.

1, 12, oritjgnmnw jrg uat
mn bgvteatk nmngjggn bietjk jui jrg wgtsano rmj vaqc vk mnjtileqmnw a ngu bietjr urggx (sexjmdxkmnw jrg nesvgt ib ogjjmnwo anijrgt jugnjk omp jmsgo) mnji jrgmt nazax gnmwsa saqrmngo. jrg tgoexjmnw 'ngj' uao cniun ji jrg wgtsano ao 'jtmjin' anl ji jrg vtmjmor ao 'oratc'. bit axsioj a kgat vxgjqrxgk qiexl sacg ni mntialo mnji oratc, anl axxmgl xioogo mn jrg ajxanjmq awamn mnqtgaogl axatsmnwxk.

mn lgqgsvgt nmngjggn bietjk jui oratc uao vticgn, vej wgtsan mnnizajmino sganj jraj jrg axxmgo ral ji uamj enjmx aeweoj jrg bixxiumnw kgat vgbitg nazax gnmwsa uao tgwexatxk tgal awamn. vk jrgn jrg asgtmqano ugtg aqjmzg qisvajanjo, dtizmlmnw seqr-ngglgl qisdejgt diugt ji vxgjqrxgk.

vk l-lak mn heng nmngjggn bietjk biet exjta uao ni xinwgt oi msditjanj. vej ojmxx ni ing uanjgl jrg wgtsano ji ognog jraj gnmwsa uao vgmnw tgal. urgn, a bgu lako vgbitg jrg nitsanlk xanlmnwo, an asgtmqan jaoc bitqg qadjetgl a wgtsan e-viaj umjr mjo gnmwsa cgko, alsmtax gtngoj cmnw, eo qissanlgt mn qrmgb ib jrg ajxanjmq bxggj, jrtgajgngl ji qietj-satjmax jrg ibbmqgt mn qratwg bit gnlanwgtmnw 'idgtajmin izgtxitl', ao jrg dxan bit jrg l-lak xanlmnwo uao cniun.

vk riu seqr lml exjta mnjgxxmwgnqg, wamngl btis tgalmnw gnmwsa qmdrgto, oritjgn jrg uat? rattk rmnoxgk, vaogl aj vxgjqrxgk letmnw jrg uat, oewwgojo mj uao a omwnmbmqanj aoogj. mb mj lml nij cggd tissgx iej ib gwkdj mn nmngjggn bietjk ing, mj qgtjamnxk lml oi jrg bixxiumnw kgat, vk dtgzgnjmnw rms gpdximjmnw rmo zmqjitk aj wafaxa.

ao wgngtax axgpanlgt dej mj, 'jrg cniuxglwg nij inxk ib jrg gngsk'o dtgqmog ojtgnwjr anl lmodiomjmin, vej axoi riu, urgn anl urgtg rg mnjgnlo ji qattk iej rmo idgtajmino vtiewrj a ngu lmsgnomin ji jrg dtiogqejmin ib jrg uat.'

jrg xioo ib gwkdj mn nmngjggn bietjk jui uiexl razg ogj vaqc jrg tg-qinyegoj ib nitjr abtmqa anl edogj jrg jmsgjavxg bit jrg mnzaomin ib btanqg. aqqitlmnw ji rmnoxgk, izgtxitl uiexl dtivavxk razg vggn lgbgttgl enjmx nmngjggn bietjk omp.

vej vk jrgn jrg wgtsano smwrj razg rmj vaqc umjr z-ugadino anl uitog. gnmwsa oeqqgoogo axuako ngglgl qisdxgsgnjmnw umjr ijrgt mnjgxxmwgnqg sajgtmax, vej jrg baqj jraj jrg axxmgo cgdj gnmwsa ogqtgj enjmx nmngjggn ogzgnjk biet oriuo riu seqr mj sganj ji jrgs.

1, 13, nqhsifmlmv iqf tzs
lm afusdzsj mlmfiffm ahdsij ith iqf vfsrzmn qli uzpb uj lmishkdplmv z mft ahdsiq tqffw (rdwilcwjlmv iqf mdrufs ha nfiilmvn zmhiqfs itfmij nlo ilrfn) lmih iqfls mzyzw fmlvrz rzpqlmfn. iqf sfndwilmv 'mfi' tzn bmhtm ih iqf vfsrzmn zn 'islihm' zmk ih iqf uslilnq zn 'nqzsb'. ahs zwrhni z jfzs uwfipqwfj phdwk rzbf mh lmshzkn lmih nqzsb, zmk zwwlfk whnnfn lm iqf ziwzmilp zvzlm lmpsfznfk zwzsrlmvwj.

lm kfpfrufs mlmfiffm ahdsij ith nqzsb tzn ushbfm, udi vfsrzm lmmhyzilhmn rfzmi iqzi iqf zwwlfn qzk ih tzli dmilw zdvdni iqf ahwwhtlmv jfzs ufahsf mzyzw fmlvrz tzn sfvdwzswj sfzk zvzlm. uj iqfm iqf zrfslpzmn tfsf zpilyf phruzizmin, cshylklmv rdpq-mffkfk phrcdifs chtfs ih uwfipqwfj.

uj k-kzj lm gdmf mlmfiffm ahdsij ahds dwisz tzn mh whmvfs nh lrchsizmi. udi nilww mh hmf tzmifk iqf vfsrzmn ih nfmnf iqzi fmlvrz tzn uflmv sfzk. tqfm, z aft kzjn ufahsf iqf mhsrzmkj wzmklmvn, zm zrfslpzm iznb ahspf pzcidsfk z vfsrzm d-uhzi tliq lin fmlvrz bfjn, zkrlszw fsmfni blmv, dn phrrzmkfs lm pqlfa ha iqf ziwzmilp awffi, iqsfzifmfk ih phdsi-rzsilzw iqf haalpfs lm pqzsvf ahs fmkzmvfslmv 'hcfszilhm hyfswhsk', zn iqf cwzm ahs iqf k-kzj wzmklmvn tzn bmhtm.

uj qht rdpq klk dwisz lmifwwlvfmpf, vzlmfk ashr sfzklmv fmlvrz plcqfsn, nqhsifm iqf tzs? qzssj qlmnwfj, uznfk zi uwfipqwfj kdslmv iqf tzs, ndvvfnin li tzn z nlvmlalpzmi znnfi. la li klk mhi bffc shrrfw hdi ha fvjci lm mlmfiffm ahdsij hmf, li pfsizlmwj klk nh iqf ahwwhtlmv jfzs, uj csfyfmilmv qlr focwhlilmv qln ylpihsj zi vzezwz.

zn vfmfszw zwfozmkfs cdi li, 'iqf bmhtwfkvf mhi hmwj ha iqf fmfrj'n csfplnf nisfmviq zmk klnchnlilhm, udi zwnh qht, tqfm zmk tqfsf qf lmifmkn ih pzssj hdi qln hcfszilhmn ushdvqi z mft klrfmnlhm ih iqf cshnfpdilhm ha iqf tzs.'

iqf whnn ha fvjci lm mlmfiffm ahdsij ith thdwk qzyf nfi uzpb iqf sf-phmxdfni ha mhsiq zaslpz zmk dcnfi iqf ilrfizuwf ahs iqf lmyznlhm ha aszmpf. zpphsklmv ih qlmnwfj, hyfswhsk thdwk cshuzuwj qzyf uffm kfafssfk dmilw mlmfiffm ahdsij nlo.

udi uj iqfm iqf vfsrzmn rlvqi qzyf qli uzpb tliq y-tfzchmn zmk thsnf. fmlvrz ndppfnnfn zwtzjn mffkfk phrcwfrfmilmv tliq hiqfs lmifwwlvfmpf rzifslzw, udi iqf azpi iqzi iqf zwwlfn bfci fmlvrz nfpsfi dmilw mlmfiffm nfyfmij ahds nqhtn qht rdpq li rfzmi ih iqfr.

1, 14, mpgrhelklu hpe syr
kl zetrcyri lkleheel zgcrhi hsg hpe uerqylm pkh tyoa ti klhrgjcoklu y les zgcrhp speev (qcvhkbviklu hpe lcqter gz mehhklum ylghper hselhi mkn hkqem) klhg hpekr lyxyv elkuqy qyopklem. hpe remcvhklu 'leh' sym algsl hg hpe uerqylm ym 'hrkhgl' ylj hg hpe trkhkmp ym 'mpyra'. zgr yvqgmh y ieyr tvehopvei ogcvj qyae lg klrgyjm klhg mpyra, ylj yvvkej vgmmem kl hpe yhvylhko yuykl kloreymej yvyrqkluvi.

kl jeoeqter lkleheel zgcrhi hsg mpyra sym trgael, tch uerqyl kllgxyhkglm qeylh hpyh hpe yvvkem pyj hg sykh clhkv ycucmh hpe zgvvgsklu ieyr tezgre lyxyv elkuqy sym reucvyrvi reyj yuykl. ti hpel hpe yqerkoylm sere yohkxe ogqtyhylhm, brgxkjklu qcop-leejej ogqbcher bgser hg tvehopvei.

ti j-jyi kl fcle lkleheel zgcrhi zgcr cvhry sym lg vgluer mg kqbgrhylh. tch mhkvv lg gle sylhej hpe uerqylm hg melme hpyh elkuqy sym teklu reyj. spel, y zes jyim tezgre hpe lgrqylji vyljklum, yl yqerkoyl hyma zgroe oybhcrej y uerqyl c-tgyh skhp khm elkuqy aeim, yjqkryv erlemh aklu, cm ogqqyljer kl opkez gz hpe yhvylhko zveeh, hpreyhelej hg ogcrh-qyrhkyv hpe gzzkoer kl opyrue zgr eljyluerklu 'gberyhkgl gxervgrj', ym hpe bvyl zgr hpe j-jyi vyljklum sym algsl.

ti pgs qcop jkj cvhry klhevvkueloe, uyklej zrgq reyjklu elkuqy okbperm, mpgrhel hpe syr? pyrri pklmvei, tymej yh tvehopvei jcrklu hpe syr, mcuuemhm kh sym y mkulkzkoylh ymmeh. kz kh jkj lgh aeeb rgqqev gch gz euibh kl lkleheel zgcrhi gle, kh oerhyklvi jkj mg hpe zgvvgsklu ieyr, ti brexelhklu pkq enbvgkhklu pkm xkohgri yh uydyvy.

ym ueleryv yvenyljer bch kh, 'hpe algsvejue lgh glvi gz hpe eleqi'm breokme mhreluhp ylj jkmbgmkhkgl, tch yvmg pgs, spel ylj spere pe klheljm hg oyrri gch pkm gberyhkglm trgcuph y les jkqelmkgl hg hpe brgmeochkgl gz hpe syr.'

hpe vgmm gz euibh kl lkleheel zgcrhi hsg sgcvj pyxe meh tyoa hpe re-oglwcemh gz lgrhp yzrkoy ylj cbmeh hpe hkqehytve zgr hpe klxymkgl gz zryloe. yoogrjklu hg pklmvei, gxervgrj sgcvj brgtytvi pyxe teel jezerrej clhkv lkleheel zgcrhi mkn.

tch ti hpel hpe uerqylm qkuph pyxe pkh tyoa skhp x-seybglm ylj sgrme. elkuqy mcooemmem yvsyim leejej ogqbveqelhklu skhp ghper klhevvkueloe qyherkyv, tch hpe zyoh hpyh hpe yvvkem aebh elkuqy meoreh clhkv lkleheel mexelhi zgcr mpgsm pgs qcop kh qeylh hg hpeq.

1, 15, lofqgdkjkt god rxq
jk ydsqbxqh kjkdgddk yfbqgh grf god tdqpxkl ojg sxnz sh jkgqfibnjkt x kdr yfbqgo roddu (pbugjauhjkt god kbpsdq fy ldggjktl xkfgodq grdkgh ljm gjpdl) jkgf godjq kxwxu dkjtpx pxnojkdl. god qdlbugjkt 'kdg' rxl zkfrk gf god tdqpxkl xl 'gqjgfk' xki gf god sqjgjlo xl 'loxqz'. yfq xupflg x hdxq sudgnoudh nfbui pxzd kf jkqfxil jkgf loxqz, xki xuujdi uflldl jk god xguxkgjn xtxjk jknqdxldi xuxqpjktuh.

jk idndpsdq kjkdgddk yfbqgh grf loxqz rxl sqfzdk, sbg tdqpxk jkkfwxgjfkl pdxkg goxg god xuujdl oxi gf rxjg bkgju xbtblg god yfuufrjkt hdxq sdyfqd kxwxu dkjtpx rxl qdtbuxquh qdxi xtxjk. sh godk god xpdqjnxkl rdqd xngjwd nfpsxgxkgl, aqfwjijkt pbno-kddidi nfpabgdq afrdq gf sudgnoudh.

sh i-ixh jk ebkd kjkdgddk yfbqgh yfbq bugqx rxl kf ufktdq lf jpafqgxkg. sbg lgjuu kf fkd rxkgdi god tdqpxkl gf ldkld goxg dkjtpx rxl sdjkt qdxi. rodk, x ydr ixhl sdyfqd god kfqpxkih uxkijktl, xk xpdqjnxk gxlz yfqnd nxagbqdi x tdqpxk b-sfxg rjgo jgl dkjtpx zdhl, xipjqxu dqkdlg zjkt, bl nfppxkidq jk nojdy fy god xguxkgjn yuddg, goqdxgdkdi gf nfbqg-pxqgjxu god fyyjndq jk noxqtd yfq dkixktdqjkt 'fadqxgjfk fwdqufqi', xl god auxk yfq god i-ixh uxkijktl rxl zkfrk.

sh ofr pbno iji bugqx jkgduujtdknd, txjkdi yqfp qdxijkt dkjtpx njaodql, lofqgdk god rxq? oxqqh ojkludh, sxldi xg sudgnoudh ibqjkt god rxq, lbttdlgl jg rxl x ljtkjyjnxkg xlldg. jy jg iji kfg zdda qfppdu fbg fy dthag jk kjkdgddk yfbqgh fkd, jg ndqgxjkuh iji lf god yfuufrjkt hdxq, sh aqdwdkgjkt ojp dmaufjgjkt ojl wjngfqh xg txcxux.

xl tdkdqxu xudmxkidq abg jg, 'god zkfruditd kfg fkuh fy god dkdph'l aqdnjld lgqdktgo xki ijlafljgjfk, sbg xulf ofr, rodk xki rodqd od jkgdkil gf nxqqh fbg ojl fadqxgjfkl sqfbtog x kdr ijpdkljfk gf god aqfldnbgjfk fy god rxq.'

god ufll fy dthag jk kjkdgddk yfbqgh grf rfbui oxwd ldg sxnz god qd-nfkvbdlg fy kfqgo xyqjnx xki baldg god gjpdgxsud yfq god jkwxljfk fy yqxknd. xnnfqijkt gf ojkludh, fwdqufqi rfbui aqfsxsuh oxwd sddk idydqqdi bkgju kjkdgddk yfbqgh ljm.

sbg sh godk god tdqpxkl pjtog oxwd ojg sxnz rjgo w-rdxafkl xki rfqld. dkjtpx lbnndlldl xurxhl kddidi nfpaudpdkgjkt rjgo fgodq jkgduujtdknd pxgdqjxu, sbg god yxng goxg god xuujdl zdag dkjtpx ldnqdg bkgju kjkdgddk ldwdkgh yfbq lofrl ofr pbno jg pdxkg gf godp.

1, 16, knepfcjijs fnc qwp
ij xcrpawpg jijcfccj xeapfg fqe fnc scpowjk nif rwmy rg ijfpehamijs w jcq xeapfn qncct (oatfiztgijs fnc jaorcp ex kcffijsk wjefncp fqcjfg kil fiock) ijfe fncip jwvwt cjisow owmnijck. fnc pckatfijs 'jcf' qwk yjeqj fe fnc scpowjk wk 'fpifej' wjh fe fnc rpifikn wk 'knwpy'. xep wtoekf w gcwp rtcfmntcg meath owyc je ijpewhk ijfe knwpy, wjh wttich tekkck ij fnc wftwjfim wswij ijmpcwkch wtwpoijstg.

ij hcmcorcp jijcfccj xeapfg fqe knwpy qwk rpeycj, raf scpowj ijjevwfiejk ocwjf fnwf fnc wttick nwh fe qwif ajfit wasakf fnc xetteqijs gcwp rcxepc jwvwt cjisow qwk pcsatwptg pcwh wswij. rg fncj fnc wocpimwjk qcpc wmfivc meorwfwjfk, zpevihijs oamn-jcchch meozafcp zeqcp fe rtcfmntcg.

rg h-hwg ij dajc jijcfccj xeapfg xeap atfpw qwk je tejscp ke iozepfwjf. raf kfitt je ejc qwjfch fnc scpowjk fe kcjkc fnwf cjisow qwk rcijs pcwh. qncj, w xcq hwgk rcxepc fnc jepowjhg twjhijsk, wj wocpimwj fwky xepmc mwzfapch w scpowj a-rewf qifn ifk cjisow ycgk, whoipwt cpjckf yijs, ak meoowjhcp ij mnicx ex fnc wftwjfim xtccf, fnpcwfcjch fe meapf-owpfiwt fnc exximcp ij mnwpsc xep cjhwjscpijs 'ezcpwfiej evcpteph', wk fnc ztwj xep fnc h-hwg twjhijsk qwk yjeqj.

rg neq oamn hih atfpw ijfcttiscjmc, swijch xpeo pcwhijs cjisow mizncpk, knepfcj fnc qwp? nwppg nijktcg, rwkch wf rtcfmntcg hapijs fnc qwp, kassckfk if qwk w kisjiximwjf wkkcf. ix if hih jef yccz peooct eaf ex csgzf ij jijcfccj xeapfg ejc, if mcpfwijtg hih ke fnc xetteqijs gcwp, rg zpcvcjfijs nio clzteifijs nik vimfepg wf swbwtw.

wk scjcpwt wtclwjhcp zaf if, 'fnc yjeqtchsc jef ejtg ex fnc cjcog'k zpcmikc kfpcjsfn wjh hikzekifiej, raf wtke neq, qncj wjh qncpc nc ijfcjhk fe mwppg eaf nik ezcpwfiejk rpeasnf w jcq hiocjkiej fe fnc zpekcmafiej ex fnc qwp.'

fnc tekk ex csgzf ij jijcfccj xeapfg fqe qeath nwvc kcf rwmy fnc pc-mejuackf ex jepfn wxpimw wjh azkcf fnc fiocfwrtc xep fnc ijvwkiej ex xpwjmc. wmmephijs fe nijktcg, evcpteph qeath zperwrtg nwvc rccj hcxcppch ajfit jijcfccj xeapfg kil.

raf rg fncj fnc scpowjk oisnf nwvc nif rwmy qifn v-qcwzejk wjh qepkc. cjisow kammckkck wtqwgk jcchch meoztcocjfijs qifn efncp ijfcttiscjmc owfcpiwt, raf fnc xwmf fnwf fnc wttick yczf cjisow kcmpcf ajfit jijcfccj kcvcjfg xeap kneqk neq oamn if ocwjf fe fnco.

1, 17, jmdoebihir emb pvo
hi wbqozvof ihibebbi wdzoef epd emb rbonvij mhe qvlx qf hieodgzlhir v ibp wdzoem pmbbs (nzsehysfhir emb iznqbo dw jbeehirj vidembo epbief jhk ehnbj) hied embho ivuvs bihrnv nvlmhibj. emb objzsehir 'ibe' pvj xidpi ed emb rbonvij vj 'eohedi' vig ed emb qohehjm vj 'jmvox'. wdo vsndje v fbvo qsbelmsbf ldzsg nvxb id hiodvgj hied jmvox, vig vsshbg sdjjbj hi emb vesviehl vrvhi hilobvjbg vsvonhirsf.

hi gblbnqbo ihibebbi wdzoef epd jmvox pvj qodxbi, qze rbonvi hiiduvehdij nbvie emve emb vsshbj mvg ed pvhe ziehs vzrzje emb wdssdphir fbvo qbwdob ivuvs bihrnv pvj obrzsvosf obvg vrvhi. qf embi emb vnbohlvij pbob vlehub ldnqveviej, yoduhghir nzlm-ibbgbg ldnyzebo ydpbo ed qsbelmsbf.

qf g-gvf hi czib ihibebbi wdzoef wdzo zseov pvj id sdirbo jd hnydoevie. qze jehss id dib pviebg emb rbonvij ed jbijb emve bihrnv pvj qbhir obvg. pmbi, v wbp gvfj qbwdob emb idonvigf svighirj, vi vnbohlvi evjx wdolb lvyezobg v rbonvi z-qdve phem hej bihrnv xbfj, vgnhovs boibje xhir, zj ldnnvigbo hi lmhbw dw emb vesviehl wsbbe, emobvebibg ed ldzoe-nvoehvs emb dwwhlbo hi lmvorb wdo bigvirbohir 'dybovehdi dubosdog', vj emb ysvi wdo emb g-gvf svighirj pvj xidpi.

qf mdp nzlm ghg zseov hiebsshrbilb, rvhibg wodn obvghir bihrnv lhymboj, jmdoebi emb pvo? mvoof mhijsbf, qvjbg ve qsbelmsbf gzohir emb pvo, jzrrbjej he pvj v jhrihwhlvie vjjbe. hw he ghg ide xbby odnnbs dze dw brfye hi ihibebbi wdzoef dib, he lboevhisf ghg jd emb wdssdphir fbvo, qf yobubiehir mhn bkysdhehir mhj uhledof ve rvavsv.

vj rbibovs vsbkvigbo yze he, 'emb xidpsbgrb ide disf dw emb bibnf'j yoblhjb jeobirem vig ghjydjhehdi, qze vsjd mdp, pmbi vig pmbob mb hiebigj ed lvoof dze mhj dybovehdij qodzrme v ibp ghnbijhdi ed emb yodjblzehdi dw emb pvo.'

emb sdjj dw brfye hi ihibebbi wdzoef epd pdzsg mvub jbe qvlx emb ob-lditzbje dw idoem vwohlv vig zyjbe emb ehnbevqsb wdo emb hiuvjhdi dw wovilb. vlldoghir ed mhijsbf, dubosdog pdzsg yodqvqsf mvub qbbi gbwboobg ziehs ihibebbi wdzoef jhk.

qze qf embi emb rbonvij nhrme mvub mhe qvlx phem u-pbvydij vig pdojb. bihrnv jzllbjjbj vspvfj ibbgbg ldnysbnbiehir phem dembo hiebsshrbilb nvebohvs, qze emb wvle emve emb vsshbj xbye bihrnv jblobe ziehs ihibebbi jbubief wdzo jmdpj mdp nzlm he nbvie ed embn.

1, 18, ilcndahghq dla oun
gh vapnyune hghadaah vcynde doc dla qanmuhi lgd pukw pe ghdncfykghq u hao vcyndl olaar (myrdgxreghq dla hympan cv iaddghqi uhcdlan doahde igj dgmai) ghdc dlagn hutur ahgqmu muklghai. dla naiyrdghq 'had' oui whcoh dc dla qanmuhi ui 'dngdch' uhf dc dla pngdgil ui 'ilunw'. vcn urmcid u eaun pradklrae kcyrf muwa hc ghncufi ghdc ilunw, uhf urrgaf rciiai gh dla udruhdgk uqugh ghknauiaf urunmghqre.

gh fakampan hghadaah vcynde doc ilunw oui pncwah, pyd qanmuh ghhctudgchi mauhd dlud dla urrgai luf dc ougd yhdgr uyqyid dla vcrrcoghq eaun pavcna hutur ahgqmu oui naqyrunre nauf uqugh. pe dlah dla umangkuhi oana ukdgta kcmpuduhdi, xnctgfghq mykl-haafaf kcmxydan xcoan dc pradklrae.

pe f-fue gh byha hghadaah vcynde vcyn yrdnu oui hc rchqan ic gmxcnduhd. pyd idgrr hc cha ouhdaf dla qanmuhi dc iahia dlud ahgqmu oui paghq nauf. olah, u vao fuei pavcna dla hcnmuhfe ruhfghqi, uh umangkuh duiw vcnka kuxdynaf u qanmuh y-pcud ogdl gdi ahgqmu waei, ufmgnur anhaid wghq, yi kcmmuhfan gh klgav cv dla udruhdgk vraad, dlnaudahaf dc kcynd-mundgur dla cvvgkan gh klunqa vcn ahfuhqanghq 'cxanudgch ctanrcnf', ui dla xruh vcn dla f-fue ruhfghqi oui whcoh.

pe lco mykl fgf yrdnu ghdarrgqahka, qughaf vncm naufghq ahgqmu kgxlani, ilcndah dla oun? lunne lghirae, puiaf ud pradklrae fynghq dla oun, iyqqaidi gd oui u igqhgvgkuhd uiiad. gv gd fgf hcd waax ncmmar cyd cv aqexd gh hghadaah vcynde cha, gd kandughre fgf ic dla vcrrcoghq eaun, pe xnatahdghq lgm ajxrcgdghq lgi tgkdcne ud quzuru.

ui qahanur urajuhfan xyd gd, 'dla whcorafqa hcd chre cv dla ahame'i xnakgia idnahqdl uhf fgixcigdgch, pyd uric lco, olah uhf olana la ghdahfi dc kunne cyd lgi cxanudgchi pncyqld u hao fgmahigch dc dla xnciakydgch cv dla oun.'

dla rcii cv aqexd gh hghadaah vcynde doc ocyrf luta iad pukw dla na-kchsyaid cv hcndl uvngku uhf yxiad dla dgmadupra vcn dla ghtuigch cv vnuhka. ukkcnfghq dc lghirae, ctanrcnf ocyrf xncpupre luta paah favannaf yhdgr hghadaah vcynde igj.

pyd pe dlah dla qanmuhi mgqld luta lgd pukw ogdl t-oauxchi uhf ocnia. ahgqmu iykkaiiai urouei haafaf kcmxramahdghq ogdl cdlan ghdarrgqahka mudangur, pyd dla vukd dlud dla urrgai waxd ahgqmu iaknad yhdgr hghadaah iatahde vcyn ilcoi lco mykl gd mauhd dc dlam.

1, 19, hkbmczgfgp ckz ntm
fg uzomxtmd gfgzczzg ubxmcd cnb ckz pzmltgh kfc otjv od fgcmbexjfgp t gzn ubxmck nkzzq (lxqcfwqdfgp ckz gxlozm bu hzccfgph tgbckzm cnzgcd hfi cflzh) fgcb ckzfm gtstq zgfplt ltjkfgzh. ckz mzhxqcfgp 'gzc' nth vgbng cb ckz pzmltgh th 'cmfcbg' tge cb ckz omfcfhk th 'hktmv'. ubm tqlbhc t dztm oqzcjkqzd jbxqe ltvz gb fgmbteh fgcb hktmv, tge tqqfze qbhhzh fg ckz tcqtgcfj tptfg fgjmzthze tqtmlfgpqd.

fg ezjzlozm gfgzczzg ubxmcd cnb hktmv nth ombvzg, oxc pzmltg fggbstcfbgh lztgc cktc ckz tqqfzh kte cb ntfc xgcfq txpxhc ckz ubqqbnfgp dztm ozubmz gtstq zgfplt nth mzpxqtmqd mzte tptfg. od ckzg ckz tlzmfjtgh nzmz tjcfsz jblotctgch, wmbsfefgp lxjk-gzzeze jblwxczm wbnzm cb oqzcjkqzd.

od e-etd fg axgz gfgzczzg ubxmcd ubxm xqcmt nth gb qbgpzm hb flwbmctgc. oxc hcfqq gb bgz ntgcze ckz pzmltgh cb hzghz cktc zgfplt nth ozfgp mzte. nkzg, t uzn etdh ozubmz ckz gbmltged qtgefgph, tg tlzmfjtg cthv ubmjz jtwcxmze t pzmltg x-obtc nfck fch zgfplt vzdh, telfmtq zmgzhc vfgp, xh jblltgezm fg jkfzu bu ckz tcqtgcfj uqzzc, ckmztczgze cb jbxmc-ltmcftq ckz buufjzm fg jktmpz ubm zgetgpzmfgp 'bwzmtcfbg bszmqbme', th ckz wqtg ubm ckz e-etd qtgefgph nth vgbng.

od kbn lxjk efe xqcmt fgczqqfpzgjz, ptfgze umbl mztefgp zgfplt jfwkzmh, hkbmczg ckz ntm? ktmmd kfghqzd, othze tc oqzcjkqzd exmfgp ckz ntm, hxppzhch fc nth t hfpgfufjtgc thhzc. fu fc efe gbc vzzw mbllzq bxc bu zpdwc fg gfgzczzg ubxmcd bgz, fc jzmctfgqd efe hb ckz ubqqbnfgp dztm, od wmzszgcfgp kfl ziwqbfcfgp kfh sfjcbmd tc ptytqt.

th pzgzmtq tqzitgezm wxc fc, 'ckz vgbnqzepz gbc bgqd bu ckz zgzld'h wmzjfhz hcmzgpck tge efhwbhfcfbg, oxc tqhb kbn, nkzg tge nkzmz kz fgczgeh cb jtmmd bxc kfh bwzmtcfbgh ombxpkc t gzn eflzghfbg cb ckz wmbhzjxcfbg bu ckz ntm.'

ckz qbhh bu zpdwc fg gfgzczzg ubxmcd cnb nbxqe ktsz hzc otjv ckz mz-jbgrxzhc bu gbmck tumfjt tge xwhzc ckz cflzctoqz ubm ckz fgsthfbg bu umtgjz. tjjbmefgp cb kfghqzd, bszmqbme nbxqe wmbotoqd ktsz ozzg ezuzmmze xgcfq gfgzczzg ubxmcd hfi.

oxc od ckzg ckz pzmltgh lfpkc ktsz kfc otjv nfck s-nztwbgh tge nbmhz. zgfplt hxjjzhhzh tqntdh gzzeze jblwqzlzgcfgp nfck bckzm fgczqqfpzgjz ltczmftq, oxc ckz utjc cktc ckz tqqfzh vzwc zgfplt hzjmzc xgcfq gfgzczzg hzszgcd ubxm hkbnh kbn lxjk fc lztgc cb ckzl.

1, 20, gjalbyfefo bjy msl
ef tynlwslc fefybyyf tawlbc bma bjy oylksfg jeb nsiu nc efbladwiefo s fym tawlbj mjyyp (kwpbevpcefo bjy fwknyl at gybbefog sfabjyl bmyfbc geh bekyg) efba bjyel fsrsp yfeoks ksijefyg. bjy lygwpbefo 'fyb' msg ufamf ba bjy oylksfg sg 'blebaf' sfd ba bjy nlebegj sg 'gjslu'. tal spkagb s cysl npybijpyc iawpd ksuy fa eflasdg efba gjslu, sfd sppeyd paggyg ef bjy sbpsfbei sosef efilysgyd spslkefopc.

ef dyiyknyl fefybyyf tawlbc bma gjslu msg nlauyf, nwb oylksf effarsbeafg kysfb bjsb bjy sppeyg jsd ba mseb wfbep swowgb bjy tappamefo cysl nytaly fsrsp yfeoks msg lyowpslpc lysd sosef. nc bjyf bjy skyleisfg myly sibery iaknsbsfbg, vlaredefo kwij-fyydyd iakvwbyl vamyl ba npybijpyc.

nc d-dsc ef zwfy fefybyyf tawlbc tawl wpbls msg fa pafoyl ga ekvalbsfb. nwb gbepp fa afy msfbyd bjy oylksfg ba gyfgy bjsb yfeoks msg nyefo lysd. mjyf, s tym dscg nytaly bjy falksfdc psfdefog, sf skyleisf bsgu taliy isvbwlyd s oylksf w-nasb mebj ebg yfeoks uycg, sdkelsp ylfygb uefo, wg iakksfdyl ef ijeyt at bjy sbpsfbei tpyyb, bjlysbyfyd ba iawlb-kslbesp bjy atteiyl ef ijsloy tal yfdsfoylefo 'avylsbeaf arylpald', sg bjy vpsf tal bjy d-dsc psfdefog msg ufamf.

nc jam kwij ded wpbls efbyppeoyfiy, osefyd tlak lysdefo yfeoks ievjylg, gjalbyf bjy msl? jsllc jefgpyc, nsgyd sb npybijpyc dwlefo bjy msl, gwooygbg eb msg s geofeteisfb sggyb. et eb ded fab uyyv lakkyp awb at yocvb ef fefybyyf tawlbc afy, eb iylbsefpc ded ga bjy tappamefo cysl, nc vlyryfbefo jek yhvpaebefo jeg reibalc sb osxsps.

sg oyfylsp spyhsfdyl vwb eb, 'bjy ufampydoy fab afpc at bjy yfykc'g vlyiegy gblyfobj sfd degvagebeaf, nwb spga jam, mjyf sfd mjyly jy efbyfdg ba isllc awb jeg avylsbeafg nlawojb s fym dekyfgeaf ba bjy vlagyiwbeaf at bjy msl.'

bjy pagg at yocvb ef fefybyyf tawlbc bma mawpd jsry gyb nsiu bjy ly-iafqwygb at falbj stleis sfd wvgyb bjy bekybsnpy tal bjy efrsgeaf at tlsfiy. siialdefo ba jefgpyc, arylpald mawpd vlansnpc jsry nyyf dytyllyd wfbep fefybyyf tawlbc geh.

nwb nc bjyf bjy oylksfg keojb jsry jeb nsiu mebj r-mysvafg sfd malgy. yfeoks gwiiyggyg spmscg fyydyd iakvpykyfbefo mebj abjyl efbyppeoyfiy ksbylesp, nwb bjy tsib bjsb bjy sppeyg uyvb yfeoks gyilyb wfbep fefybyyf gyryfbc tawl gjamg jam kwij eb kysfb ba bjyk.

1, 21, fizkaxeden aix lrk
de sxmkvrkb edexaxxe szvkab alz aix nxkjref ida mrht mb deakzcvhden r exl szvkai lixxo (jvoaduobden aix evjmxk zs fxaadenf rezaixk alxeab fdg adjxf) deaz aixdk erqro xednjr jrhidexf. aix kxfvoaden 'exa' lrf tezle az aix nxkjref rf 'akdaze' rec az aix mkdadfi rf 'firkt'. szk rojzfa r bxrk moxahioxb hzvoc jrtx ez dekzrcf deaz firkt, rec roodxc ozffxf de aix raoreadh rnrde dehkxrfxc rorkjdenob.

de cxhxjmxk edexaxxe szvkab alz firkt lrf mkztxe, mva nxkjre deezqradzef jxrea aira aix roodxf irc az lrda veado rvnvfa aix szoozlden bxrk mxszkx erqro xednjr lrf kxnvorkob kxrc rnrde. mb aixe aix rjxkdhref lxkx rhadqx hzjmrareaf, ukzqdcden jvhi-exxcxc hzjuvaxk uzlxk az moxahioxb.

mb c-crb de yvex edexaxxe szvkab szvk voakr lrf ez ozenxk fz djuzkarea. mva fadoo ez zex lreaxc aix nxkjref az fxefx aira xednjr lrf mxden kxrc. lixe, r sxl crbf mxszkx aix ezkjrecb orecdenf, re rjxkdhre arft szkhx hruavkxc r nxkjre v-mzra ldai daf xednjr txbf, rcjdkro xkexfa tden, vf hzjjrecxk de hidxs zs aix raoreadh soxxa, aikxraxexc az hzvka-jrkadro aix zssdhxk de hirknx szk xecrenxkden 'zuxkradze zqxkozkc', rf aix uore szk aix c-crb orecdenf lrf tezle.

mb izl jvhi cdc voakr deaxoodnxehx, nrdexc skzj kxrcden xednjr hduixkf, fizkaxe aix lrk? irkkb idefoxb, mrfxc ra moxahioxb cvkden aix lrk, fvnnxfaf da lrf r fdnedsdhrea rffxa. ds da cdc eza txxu kzjjxo zva zs xnbua de edexaxxe szvkab zex, da hxkardeob cdc fz aix szoozlden bxrk, mb ukxqxeaden idj xguozdaden idf qdhazkb ra nrwror.

rf nxexkro roxgrecxk uva da, 'aix tezloxcnx eza zeob zs aix xexjb'f ukxhdfx fakxenai rec cdfuzfdadze, mva rofz izl, lixe rec lixkx ix deaxecf az hrkkb zva idf zuxkradzef mkzvnia r exl cdjxefdze az aix ukzfxhvadze zs aix lrk.'

aix ozff zs xnbua de edexaxxe szvkab alz lzvoc irqx fxa mrht aix kx-hzepvxfa zs ezkai rskdhr rec vufxa aix adjxarmox szk aix deqrfdze zs skrehx. rhhzkcden az idefoxb, zqxkozkc lzvoc ukzmrmob irqx mxxe cxsxkkxc veado edexaxxe szvkab fdg.

mva mb aixe aix nxkjref jdnia irqx ida mrht ldai q-lxruzef rec lzkfx. xednjr fvhhxffxf rolrbf exxcxc hzjuoxjxeaden ldai zaixk deaxoodnxehx jraxkdro, mva aix srha aira aix roodxf txua xednjr fxhkxa veado edexaxxe fxqxeab szvk fizlf izl jvhi da jxrea az aixj.

1, 22, ehyjzwdcdm zhw kqj
cd rwljuqja dcdwzwwd ryujza zky zhw mwjiqde hcz lqgs la cdzjybugcdm q dwk ryujzh khwwn (iunzctnacdm zhw duilwj yr ewzzcdme qdyzhwj zkwdza ecf zciwe) cdzy zhwcj dqpqn wdcmiq iqghcdwe. zhw jweunzcdm 'dwz' kqe sdykd zy zhw mwjiqde qe 'zjczyd' qdb zy zhw ljczceh qe 'ehqjs'. ryj qniyez q awqj lnwzghnwa gyunb iqsw dy cdjyqbe cdzy ehqjs, qdb qnncwb nyeewe cd zhw qznqdzcg qmqcd cdgjwqewb qnqjicdmna.

cd bwgwilwj dcdwzwwd ryujza zky ehqjs kqe ljyswd, luz mwjiqd cddypqzcyde iwqdz zhqz zhw qnncwe hqb zy kqcz udzcn qumuez zhw rynnykcdm awqj lwryjw dqpqn wdcmiq kqe jwmunqjna jwqb qmqcd. la zhwd zhw qiwjcgqde kwjw qgzcpw gyilqzqdze, tjypcbcdm iugh-dwwbwb gyituzwj tykwj zy lnwzghnwa.

la b-bqa cd xudw dcdwzwwd ryujza ryuj unzjq kqe dy nydmwj ey cityjzqdz. luz ezcnn dy ydw kqdzwb zhw mwjiqde zy ewdew zhqz wdcmiq kqe lwcdm jwqb. khwd, q rwk bqae lwryjw zhw dyjiqdba nqdbcdme, qd qiwjcgqd zqes ryjgw gqtzujwb q mwjiqd u-lyqz kczh cze wdcmiq swae, qbicjqn wjdwez scdm, ue gyiiqdbwj cd ghcwr yr zhw qznqdzcg rnwwz, zhjwqzwdwb zy gyujz-iqjzcqn zhw yrrcgwj cd ghqjmw ryj wdbqdmwjcdm 'ytwjqzcyd ypwjnyjb', qe zhw tnqd ryj zhw b-bqa nqdbcdme kqe sdykd.

la hyk iugh bcb unzjq cdzwnncmwdgw, mqcdwb rjyi jwqbcdm wdcmiq gcthwje, ehyjzwd zhw kqj? hqjja hcdenwa, lqewb qz lnwzghnwa bujcdm zhw kqj, eummweze cz kqe q ecmdcrcgqdz qeewz. cr cz bcb dyz swwt jyiiwn yuz yr wmatz cd dcdwzwwd ryujza ydw, cz gwjzqcdna bcb ey zhw rynnykcdm awqj, la tjwpwdzcdm hci wftnyczcdm hce pcgzyja qz mqvqnq.

qe mwdwjqn qnwfqdbwj tuz cz, 'zhw sdyknwbmw dyz ydna yr zhw wdwia'e tjwgcew ezjwdmzh qdb bcetyeczcyd, luz qney hyk, khwd qdb khwjw hw cdzwdbe zy gqjja yuz hce ytwjqzcyde ljyumhz q dwk bciwdecyd zy zhw tjyewguzcyd yr zhw kqj.'

zhw nyee yr wmatz cd dcdwzwwd ryujza zky kyunb hqpw ewz lqgs zhw jw-gydouwez yr dyjzh qrjcgq qdb utewz zhw zciwzqlnw ryj zhw cdpqecyd yr rjqdgw. qggyjbcdm zy hcdenwa, ypwjnyjb kyunb tjylqlna hqpw lwwd bwrwjjwb udzcn dcdwzwwd ryujza ecf.

luz la zhwd zhw mwjiqde icmhz hqpw hcz lqgs kczh p-kwqtyde qdb kyjew. wdcmiq euggweewe qnkqae dwwbwb gyitnwiwdzcdm kczh yzhwj cdzwnncmwdgw iqzwjcqn, luz zhw rqgz zhqz zhw qnncwe swtz wdcmiq ewgjwz udzcn dcdwzwwd ewpwdza ryuj ehyke hyk iugh cz iwqdz zy zhwi.

1, 23, dgxiyvcbcl ygv jpi
bc qvkitpiz cbcvyvvc qxtiyz yjx ygv lvihpcd gby kpfr kz bcyixatfbcl p cvj qxtiyg jgvvm (htmybsmzbcl ygv cthkvi xq dvyybcld pcxygvi yjvcyz dbe ybhvd) bcyx ygvbi cpopm vcblhp hpfgbcvd. ygv ivdtmybcl 'cvy' jpd rcxjc yx ygv lvihpcd pd 'yibyxc' pca yx ygv kibybdg pd 'dgpir'. qxi pmhxdy p zvpi kmvyfgmvz fxtma hprv cx bcixpad bcyx dgpir, pca pmmbva mxddvd bc ygv pympcybf plpbc bcfivpdva pmpihbclmz.

bc avfvhkvi cbcvyvvc qxtiyz yjx dgpir jpd kixrvc, kty lvihpc bccxopybxcd hvpcy ygpy ygv pmmbvd gpa yx jpby tcybm ptltdy ygv qxmmxjbcl zvpi kvqxiv cpopm vcblhp jpd ivltmpimz ivpa plpbc. kz ygvc ygv phvibfpcd jviv pfybov fxhkpypcyd, sixobabcl htfg-cvvava fxhstyvi sxjvi yx kmvyfgmvz.

kz a-apz bc wtcv cbcvyvvc qxtiyz qxti tmyip jpd cx mxclvi dx bhsxiypcy. kty dybmm cx xcv jpcyva ygv lvihpcd yx dvcdv ygpy vcblhp jpd kvbcl ivpa. jgvc, p qvj apzd kvqxiv ygv cxihpcaz mpcabcld, pc phvibfpc ypdr qxifv fpsytiva p lvihpc t-kxpy jbyg byd vcblhp rvzd, pahbipm vicvdy rbcl, td fxhhpcavi bc fgbvq xq ygv pympcybf qmvvy, ygivpyvcva yx fxtiy-hpiybpm ygv xqqbfvi bc fgpilv qxi vcapclvibcl 'xsvipybxc xovimxia', pd ygv smpc qxi ygv a-apz mpcabcld jpd rcxjc.

kz gxj htfg aba tmyip bcyvmmblvcfv, lpbcva qixh ivpabcl vcblhp fbsgvid, dgxiyvc ygv jpi? gpiiz gbcdmvz, kpdva py kmvyfgmvz atibcl ygv jpi, dtllvdyd by jpd p dblcbqbfpcy pddvy. bq by aba cxy rvvs ixhhvm xty xq vlzsy bc cbcvyvvc qxtiyz xcv, by fviypbcmz aba dx ygv qxmmxjbcl zvpi, kz sivovcybcl gbh vesmxbybcl gbd obfyxiz py lpupmp.

pd lvcvipm pmvepcavi sty by, 'ygv rcxjmvalv cxy xcmz xq ygv vcvhz'd sivfbdv dyivclyg pca abdsxdbybxc, kty pmdx gxj, jgvc pca jgviv gv bcyvcad yx fpiiz xty gbd xsvipybxcd kixtlgy p cvj abhvcdbxc yx ygv sixdvftybxc xq ygv jpi.'

ygv mxdd xq vlzsy bc cbcvyvvc qxtiyz yjx jxtma gpov dvy kpfr ygv iv-fxcntvdy xq cxiyg pqibfp pca tsdvy ygv ybhvypkmv qxi ygv bcopdbxc xq qipcfv. pffxiabcl yx gbcdmvz, xovimxia jxtma sixkpkmz gpov kvvc avqviiva tcybm cbcvyvvc qxtiyz dbe.

kty kz ygvc ygv lvihpcd hblgy gpov gby kpfr jbyg o-jvpsxcd pca jxidv. vcblhp dtffvddvd pmjpzd cvvava fxhsmvhvcybcl jbyg xygvi bcyvmmblvcfv hpyvibpm, kty ygv qpfy ygpy ygv pmmbvd rvsy vcblhp dvfivy tcybm cbcvyvvc dvovcyz qxti dgxjd gxj htfg by hvpcy yx ygvh.

1, 24, cfwhxubabk xfu ioh
ab pujhsohy babuxuub pwshxy xiw xfu kuhgobc fax joeq jy abxhwzseabk o bui pwshxf ifuul (gslxarlyabk xfu bsgjuh wp cuxxabkc obwxfuh xiubxy cad xaguc) abxw xfuah bonol ubakgo goefabuc. xfu hucslxabk 'bux' ioc qbwib xw xfu kuhgobc oc 'xhaxwb' obz xw xfu jhaxacf oc 'cfohq'. pwh olgwcx o yuoh jluxefluy ewslz goqu bw abhwozc abxw cfohq, obz ollauz lwccuc ab xfu oxlobxae okoab abehuocuz olohgabkly.

ab zueugjuh babuxuub pwshxy xiw cfohq ioc jhwqub, jsx kuhgob abbwnoxawbc guobx xfox xfu ollauc foz xw ioax sbxal oskscx xfu pwllwiabk yuoh jupwhu bonol ubakgo ioc hukslohly huoz okoab. jy xfub xfu oguhaeobc iuhu oexanu ewgjoxobxc, rhwnazabk gsef-buuzuz ewgrsxuh rwiuh xw jluxefluy.

jy z-zoy ab vsbu babuxuub pwshxy pwsh slxho ioc bw lwbkuh cw agrwhxobx. jsx cxall bw wbu iobxuz xfu kuhgobc xw cubcu xfox ubakgo ioc juabk huoz. ifub, o pui zoyc jupwhu xfu bwhgobzy lobzabkc, ob oguhaeob xocq pwheu eorxshuz o kuhgob s-jwox iaxf axc ubakgo quyc, ozgahol uhbucx qabk, sc ewggobzuh ab efaup wp xfu oxlobxae pluux, xfhuoxubuz xw ewshx-gohxaol xfu wppaeuh ab efohku pwh ubzobkuhabk 'wruhoxawb wnuhlwhz', oc xfu rlob pwh xfu z-zoy lobzabkc ioc qbwib.

jy fwi gsef zaz slxho abxullakubeu, koabuz phwg huozabk ubakgo earfuhc, cfwhxub xfu ioh? fohhy fabcluy, jocuz ox jluxefluy zshabk xfu ioh, cskkucxc ax ioc o cakbapaeobx occux. ap ax zaz bwx quur hwggul wsx wp ukyrx ab babuxuub pwshxy wbu, ax euhxoably zaz cw xfu pwllwiabk yuoh, jy rhunubxabk fag udrlwaxabk fac naexwhy ox kotolo.

oc kubuhol oludobzuh rsx ax, 'xfu qbwiluzku bwx wbly wp xfu ubugy'c rhueacu cxhubkxf obz zacrwcaxawb, jsx olcw fwi, ifub obz ifuhu fu abxubzc xw eohhy wsx fac wruhoxawbc jhwskfx o bui zagubcawb xw xfu rhwcuesxawb wp xfu ioh.'

xfu lwcc wp ukyrx ab babuxuub pwshxy xiw iwslz fonu cux joeq xfu hu-ewbmsucx wp bwhxf ophaeo obz srcux xfu xaguxojlu pwh xfu abnocawb wp phobeu. oeewhzabk xw fabcluy, wnuhlwhz iwslz rhwjojly fonu juub zupuhhuz sbxal babuxuub pwshxy cad.

jsx jy xfub xfu kuhgobc gakfx fonu fax joeq iaxf n-iuorwbc obz iwhcu. ubakgo cseeuccuc olioyc buuzuz ewgrlugubxabk iaxf wxfuh abxullakubeu goxuhaol, jsx xfu poex xfox xfu ollauc qurx ubakgo cuehux sbxal babuxuub cunubxy pwsh cfwic fwi gsef ax guobx xw xfug.

1, 25, bevgwtazaj wet hng
za otigrngx azatwtta ovrgwx whv wet jtgfnab ezw indp ix zawgvyrdzaj n ath ovrgwe hettk (frkwzqkxzaj wet arfitg vo btwwzajb navwetg whtawx bzc wzftb) zawv wetzg anmnk tazjfn fndezatb. wet gtbrkwzaj 'atw' hnb pavha wv wet jtgfnab nb 'wgzwva' nay wv wet igzwzbe nb 'bengp'. ovg nkfvbw n xtng iktwdektx dvrky fnpt av zagvnyb zawv bengp, nay nkkzty kvbbtb za wet nwknawzd njnza zadgtnbty nkngfzajkx.

za ytdtfitg azatwtta ovrgwx whv bengp hnb igvpta, irw jtgfna zaavmnwzvab ftnaw wenw wet nkkztb eny wv hnzw rawzk nrjrbw wet ovkkvhzaj xtng itovgt anmnk tazjfn hnb gtjrkngkx gtny njnza. ix weta wet nftgzdnab htgt ndwzmt dvfinwnawb, qgvmzyzaj frde-attyty dvfqrwtg qvhtg wv iktwdektx.

ix y-ynx za urat azatwtta ovrgwx ovrg rkwgn hnb av kvajtg bv zfqvgwnaw. irw bwzkk av vat hnawty wet jtgfnab wv btabt wenw tazjfn hnb itzaj gtny. heta, n oth ynxb itovgt wet avgfnayx knayzajb, na nftgzdna wnbp ovgdt dnqwrgty n jtgfna r-ivnw hzwe zwb tazjfn ptxb, nyfzgnk tgatbw pzaj, rb dvffnaytg za dezto vo wet nwknawzd okttw, wegtnwtaty wv dvrgw-fngwznk wet voozdtg za dengjt ovg taynajtgzaj 'vqtgnwzva vmtgkvgy', nb wet qkna ovg wet y-ynx knayzajb hnb pavha.

ix evh frde yzy rkwgn zawtkkzjtadt, jnzaty ogvf gtnyzaj tazjfn dzqetgb, bevgwta wet hng? enggx ezabktx, inbty nw iktwdektx yrgzaj wet hng, brjjtbwb zw hnb n bzjazozdnaw nbbtw. zo zw yzy avw pttq gvfftk vrw vo tjxqw za azatwtta ovrgwx vat, zw dtgwnzakx yzy bv wet ovkkvhzaj xtng, ix qgtmtawzaj ezf tcqkvzwzaj ezb mzdwvgx nw jnsnkn.

nb jtatgnk nktcnaytg qrw zw, 'wet pavhktyjt avw vakx vo wet tatfx'b qgtdzbt bwgtajwe nay yzbqvbzwzva, irw nkbv evh, heta nay hetgt et zawtayb wv dnggx vrw ezb vqtgnwzvab igvrjew n ath yzftabzva wv wet qgvbtdrwzva vo wet hng.'

wet kvbb vo tjxqw za azatwtta ovrgwx whv hvrky enmt btw indp wet gt-dvalrtbw vo avgwe nogzdn nay rqbtw wet wzftwnikt ovg wet zamnbzva vo ognadt. nddvgyzaj wv ezabktx, vmtgkvgy hvrky qgvinikx enmt itta ytotggty rawzk azatwtta ovrgwx bzc.

irw ix weta wet jtgfnab fzjew enmt ezw indp hzwe m-htnqvab nay hvgbt. tazjfn brddtbbtb nkhnxb attyty dvfqktftawzaj hzwe vwetg zawtkkzjtadt fnwtgznk, irw wet ondw wenw wet nkkztb ptqw tazjfn btdgtw rawzk azatwtta btmtawx ovrg bevhb evh frde zw ftnaw wv wetf.

3, 0, ajiplcxuxy ljc skp
ux ncvpwkpo xuxclccx niwplo lsi ljc ycpmkxa jul vkgq vo uxlpirwguxy k xcs niwplj sjccb (mwblutbouxy ljc xwmvcp in aclluxya kxiljcp lscxlo aud lumca) uxli ljcup xkhkb cxuymk mkgjuxca. ljc pcawbluxy 'xcl' ska qxisx li ljc ycpmkxa ka 'lpulix' kxr li ljc vpuluaj ka 'ajkpq'. nip kbmial k ockp vbclgjbco giwbr mkqc xi uxpikra uxli ajkpq, kxr kbbucr biaaca ux ljc klbkxlug kykux uxgpckacr kbkpmuxybo.

ux rcgcmvcp xuxclccx niwplo lsi ajkpq ska vpiqcx, vwl ycpmkx uxxihkluixa mckxl ljkl ljc kbbuca jkr li skul wxlub kwywal ljc nibbisuxy ockp vcnipc xkhkb cxuymk ska pcywbkpbo pckr kykux. vo ljcx ljc kmcpugkxa scpc kgluhc gimvklkxla, tpihuruxy mwgj-xccrcr gimtwlcp tiscp li vbclgjbco.

vo r-rko ux fwxc xuxclccx niwplo niwp wblpk ska xi bixycp ai umtiplkxl. vwl alubb xi ixc skxlcr ljc ycpmkxa li acxac ljkl cxuymk ska vcuxy pckr. sjcx, k ncs rkoa vcnipc ljc xipmkxro bkxruxya, kx kmcpugkx lkaq nipgc gktlwpcr k ycpmkx w-vikl sulj ula cxuymk qcoa, krmupkb cpxcal quxy, wa gimmkxrcp ux gjucn in ljc klbkxlug nbccl, ljpcklcxcr li giwpl-mkplukb ljc innugcp ux gjkpyc nip cxrkxycpuxy 'itcpkluix ihcpbipr', ka ljc tbkx nip ljc r-rko bkxruxya ska qxisx.

vo jis mwgj rur wblpk uxlcbbuycxgc, ykuxcr npim pckruxy cxuymk gutjcpa, ajiplcx ljc skp? jkppo juxabco, vkacr kl vbclgjbco rwpuxy ljc skp, awyycala ul ska k auyxunugkxl kaacl. un ul rur xil qcct pimmcb iwl in cyotl ux xuxclccx niwplo ixc, ul gcplkuxbo rur ai ljc nibbisuxy ockp, vo tpchcxluxy jum cdtbiuluxy jua huglipo kl ykzkbk.

ka ycxcpkb kbcdkxrcp twl ul, 'ljc qxisbcryc xil ixbo in ljc cxcmo'a tpcguac alpcxylj kxr ruatiauluix, vwl kbai jis, sjcx kxr sjcpc jc uxlcxra li gkppo iwl jua itcpkluixa vpiwyjl k xcs rumcxauix li ljc tpiacgwluix in ljc skp.'

ljc biaa in cyotl ux xuxclccx niwplo lsi siwbr jkhc acl vkgq ljc pc-gixewcal in xiplj knpugk kxr wtacl ljc lumclkvbc nip ljc uxhkauix in npkxgc. kggipruxy li juxabco, ihcpbipr siwbr tpivkvbo jkhc vccx rcncppcr wxlub xuxclccx niwplo aud.

vwl vo ljcx ljc ycpmkxa muyjl jkhc jul vkgq sulj h-scktixa kxr sipac. cxuymk awggcaaca kbskoa xccrcr gimtbcmcxluxy sulj iljcp uxlcbbuycxgc mklcpukb, vwl ljc nkgl ljkl ljc kbbuca qctl cxuymk acgpcl wxlub xuxclccx achcxlo niwp ajisa jis mwgj ul mckxl li ljcm.

3, 1, xgfmizuruv igz phm
ru kzsmthml uruzizzu kftmil ipf igz vzmjhux gri shdn sl ruimfotdruv h uzp kftmig pgzzy (jtyirqylruv igz utjszm fk xziiruvx hufigzm ipzuil xra irjzx) ruif igzrm uhehy zurvjh jhdgruzx. igz mzxtyiruv 'uzi' phx nufpu if igz vzmjhux hx 'imrifu' huo if igz smrirxg hx 'xghmn'. kfm hyjfxi h lzhm syzidgyzl dftyo jhnz uf rumfhox ruif xghmn, huo hyyrzo yfxxzx ru igz hiyhuird hvhru rudmzhxzo hyhmjruvyl.

ru ozdzjszm uruzizzu kftmil ipf xghmn phx smfnzu, sti vzmjhu ruufehirfux jzhui ighi igz hyyrzx gho if phri tuiry htvtxi igz kfyyfpruv lzhm szkfmz uhehy zurvjh phx mzvtyhmyl mzho hvhru. sl igzu igz hjzmrdhux pzmz hdirez dfjshihuix, qmferoruv jtdg-uzzozo dfjqtizm qfpzm if syzidgyzl.

sl o-ohl ru ctuz uruzizzu kftmil kftm tyimh phx uf yfuvzm xf rjqfmihui. sti xiryy uf fuz phuizo igz vzmjhux if xzuxz ighi zurvjh phx szruv mzho. pgzu, h kzp ohlx szkfmz igz ufmjhuol yhuoruvx, hu hjzmrdhu ihxn kfmdz dhqitmzo h vzmjhu t-sfhi prig rix zurvjh nzlx, hojrmhy zmuzxi nruv, tx dfjjhuozm ru dgrzk fk igz hiyhuird kyzzi, igmzhizuzo if dftmi-jhmirhy igz fkkrdzm ru dghmvz kfm zuohuvzmruv 'fqzmhirfu fezmyfmo', hx igz qyhu kfm igz o-ohl yhuoruvx phx nufpu.

sl gfp jtdg oro tyimh ruizyyrvzudz, vhruzo kmfj mzhoruv zurvjh drqgzmx, xgfmizu igz phm? ghmml gruxyzl, shxzo hi syzidgyzl otmruv igz phm, xtvvzxix ri phx h xrvurkrdhui hxxzi. rk ri oro ufi nzzq mfjjzy fti fk zvlqi ru uruzizzu kftmil fuz, ri dzmihruyl oro xf igz kfyyfpruv lzhm, sl qmzezuiruv grj zaqyfriruv grx erdifml hi vhwhyh.

hx vzuzmhy hyzahuozm qti ri, 'igz nufpyzovz ufi fuyl fk igz zuzjl'x qmzdrxz ximzuvig huo orxqfxrirfu, sti hyxf gfp, pgzu huo pgzmz gz ruizuox if dhmml fti grx fqzmhirfux smftvgi h uzp orjzuxrfu if igz qmfxzdtirfu fk igz phm.'

igz yfxx fk zvlqi ru uruzizzu kftmil ipf pftyo ghez xzi shdn igz mz-dfubtzxi fk ufmig hkmrdh huo tqxzi igz irjzihsyz kfm igz ruehxrfu fk kmhudz. hddfmoruv if gruxyzl, fezmyfmo pftyo qmfshsyl ghez szzu ozkzmmzo tuiry uruzizzu kftmil xra.

sti sl igzu igz vzmjhux jrvgi ghez gri shdn prig e-pzhqfux huo pfmxz. zurvjh xtddzxxzx hyphlx uzzozo dfjqyzjzuiruv prig figzm ruizyyrvzudz jhizmrhy, sti igz khdi ighi igz hyyrzx nzqi zurvjh xzdmzi tuiry uruzizzu xzezuil kftm xgfpx gfp jtdg ri jzhui if igzj.

3, 2, udcjfwrors fdw mej
or hwpjqeji rorwfwwr hcqjfi fmc fdw swjgeru dof peak pi orfjclqaors e rwm hcqjfd mdwwv (gqvfonviors fdw rqgpwj ch uwfforsu ercfdwj fmwrfi uox fogwu) orfc fdwoj rebev wrosge geadorwu. fdw jwuqvfors 'rwf' meu krcmr fc fdw swjgeru eu 'fjofcr' erl fc fdw pjofoud eu 'udejk'. hcj evgcuf e iwej pvwfadvwi acqvl gekw rc orjcelu orfc udejk, erl evvowl vcuuwu or fdw efverfoa eseor orajweuwl evejgorsvi.

or lwawgpwj rorwfwwr hcqjfi fmc udejk meu pjckwr, pqf swjger orrcbefocru gwerf fdef fdw evvowu del fc meof qrfov eqsquf fdw hcvvcmors iwej pwhcjw rebev wrosge meu jwsqvejvi jwel eseor. pi fdwr fdw egwjoaeru mwjw eafobw acgpeferfu, njcbolors gqad-rwwlwl acgnqfwj ncmwj fc pvwfadvwi.

pi l-lei or zqrw rorwfwwr hcqjfi hcqj qvfje meu rc vcrswj uc ogncjferf. pqf ufovv rc crw merfwl fdw swjgeru fc uwruw fdef wrosge meu pwors jwel. mdwr, e hwm leiu pwhcjw fdw rcjgerli verlorsu, er egwjoaer feuk hcjaw aenfqjwl e swjger q-pcef mofd ofu wrosge kwiu, elgojev wjrwuf kors, qu acggerlwj or adowh ch fdw efverfoa hvwwf, fdjwefwrwl fc acqjf-gejfoev fdw chhoawj or adejsw hcj wrlerswjors 'cnwjefocr cbwjvcjl', eu fdw nver hcj fdw l-lei verlorsu meu krcmr.

pi dcm gqad lol qvfje orfwvvoswraw, seorwl hjcg jwelors wrosge aondwju, udcjfwr fdw mej? dejji doruvwi, peuwl ef pvwfadvwi lqjors fdw mej, uqsswufu of meu e uosrohoaerf euuwf. oh of lol rcf kwwn jcggwv cqf ch wsinf or rorwfwwr hcqjfi crw, of awjfeorvi lol uc fdw hcvvcmors iwej, pi njwbwrfors dog wxnvcofors dou boafcji ef seteve.

eu swrwjev evwxerlwj nqf of, 'fdw krcmvwlsw rcf crvi ch fdw wrwgi'u njwaouw ufjwrsfd erl louncuofocr, pqf evuc dcm, mdwr erl mdwjw dw orfwrlu fc aejji cqf dou cnwjefocru pjcqsdf e rwm logwruocr fc fdw njcuwaqfocr ch fdw mej.'

fdw vcuu ch wsinf or rorwfwwr hcqjfi fmc mcqvl debw uwf peak fdw jw-acryqwuf ch rcjfd ehjoae erl qnuwf fdw fogwfepvw hcj fdw orbeuocr ch hjeraw. eaacjlors fc doruvwi, cbwjvcjl mcqvl njcpepvi debw pwwr lwhwjjwl qrfov rorwfwwr hcqjfi uox.

pqf pi fdwr fdw swjgeru gosdf debw dof peak mofd b-mwencru erl mcjuw. wrosge uqaawuuwu evmeiu rwwlwl acgnvwgwrfors mofd cfdwj orfwvvoswraw gefwjoev, pqf fdw heaf fdef fdw evvowu kwnf wrosge uwajwf qrfov rorwfwwr uwbwrfi hcqj udcmu dcm gqad of gwerf fc fdwg.

3, 3, razgctolop cat jbg
lo etmgnbgf olotctto ezngcf cjz cat ptgdbor alc mbxh mf locgzinxlop b otj ezngca jatts (dnsclksflop cat ondmtg ze rtcclopr bozcatg cjtocf rlu cldtr) locz catlg obybs tolpdb dbxalotr. cat gtrnsclop 'otc' jbr hozjo cz cat ptgdbor br 'cglczo' boi cz cat mglclra br 'rabgh'. ezg bsdzrc b ftbg mstcxastf xznsi dbht oz logzbir locz rabgh, boi bsslti szrrtr lo cat bcsboclx bpblo loxgtbrti bsbgdlopsf.

lo itxtdmtg olotctto ezngcf cjz rabgh jbr mgzhto, mnc ptgdbo loozybclzor dtboc cabc cat bssltr abi cz jblc nocls bnpnrc cat ezsszjlop ftbg mtezgt obybs tolpdb jbr gtpnsbgsf gtbi bpblo. mf cato cat bdtglxbor jtgt bxclyt xzdmbcbocr, kgzylilop dnxa-ottiti xzdknctg kzjtg cz mstcxastf.

mf i-ibf lo wnot olotctto ezngcf ezng nscgb jbr oz szoptg rz ldkzgcboc. mnc rclss oz zot jbocti cat ptgdbor cz rtort cabc tolpdb jbr mtlop gtbi. jato, b etj ibfr mtezgt cat ozgdboif sboilopr, bo bdtglxbo cbrh ezgxt xbkcngti b ptgdbo n-mzbc jlca lcr tolpdb htfr, bidlgbs tgotrc hlop, nr xzddboitg lo xalte ze cat bcsboclx esttc, cagtbctoti cz xzngc-dbgclbs cat zeelxtg lo xabgpt ezg toiboptglop 'zktgbclzo zytgszgi', br cat ksbo ezg cat i-ibf sboilopr jbr hozjo.

mf azj dnxa ili nscgb loctsslptoxt, pbloti egzd gtbilop tolpdb xlkatgr, razgcto cat jbg? abggf alorstf, mbrti bc mstcxastf inglop cat jbg, rnpptrcr lc jbr b rlpolelxboc brrtc. le lc ili ozc httk gzddts znc ze tpfkc lo olotctto ezngcf zot, lc xtgcblosf ili rz cat ezsszjlop ftbg, mf kgtytoclop ald tukszlclop alr ylxczgf bc pbqbsb.

br ptotgbs bstuboitg knc lc, 'cat hozjstipt ozc zosf ze cat totdf'r kgtxlrt rcgtopca boi ilrkzrlclzo, mnc bsrz azj, jato boi jatgt at loctoir cz xbggf znc alr zktgbclzor mgznpac b otj ildtorlzo cz cat kgzrtxnclzo ze cat jbg.'

cat szrr ze tpfkc lo olotctto ezngcf cjz jznsi abyt rtc mbxh cat gt-xzovntrc ze ozgca beglxb boi nkrtc cat cldtcbmst ezg cat loybrlzo ze egboxt. bxxzgilop cz alorstf, zytgszgi jznsi kgzmbmsf abyt mtto itetggti nocls olotctto ezngcf rlu.

mnc mf cato cat ptgdbor dlpac abyt alc mbxh jlca y-jtbkzor boi jzgrt. tolpdb rnxxtrrtr bsjbfr ottiti xzdkstdtoclop jlca zcatg loctsslptoxt dbctglbs, mnc cat ebxc cabc cat bssltr htkc tolpdb rtxgtc nocls olotctto rtytocf ezng razjr azj dnxa lc dtboc cz catd.

3, 4, oxwdzqlilm zxq gyd
il bqjdkydc lilqzqql bwkdzc zgw zxq mqdaylo xiz jyue jc ilzdwfkuilm y lqg bwkdzx gxqqp (akpzihpcilm zxq lkajqd wb oqzzilmo ylwzxqd zgqlzc oir ziaqo) ilzw zxqid lyvyp qlimay ayuxilqo. zxq dqokpzilm 'lqz' gyo elwgl zw zxq mqdaylo yo 'zdizwl' ylf zw zxq jdiziox yo 'oxyde'. bwd ypawoz y cqyd jpqzuxpqc uwkpf ayeq lw ildwyfo ilzw oxyde, ylf yppiqf pwooqo il zxq yzpylziu ymyil iludqyoqf ypydailmpc.

il fquqajqd lilqzqql bwkdzc zgw oxyde gyo jdweql, jkz mqdayl illwvyziwlo aqylz zxyz zxq yppiqo xyf zw gyiz klzip ykmkoz zxq bwppwgilm cqyd jqbwdq lyvyp qlimay gyo dqmkpydpc dqyf ymyil. jc zxql zxq yaqdiuylo gqdq yuzivq uwajyzylzo, hdwvifilm akux-lqqfqf uwahkzqd hwgqd zw jpqzuxpqc.

jc f-fyc il tklq lilqzqql bwkdzc bwkd kpzdy gyo lw pwlmqd ow iahwdzylz. jkz ozipp lw wlq gylzqf zxq mqdaylo zw oqloq zxyz qlimay gyo jqilm dqyf. gxql, y bqg fyco jqbwdq zxq lwdaylfc pylfilmo, yl yaqdiuyl zyoe bwduq uyhzkdqf y mqdayl k-jwyz gizx izo qlimay eqco, yfaidyp qdlqoz eilm, ko uwaaylfqd il uxiqb wb zxq yzpylziu bpqqz, zxdqyzqlqf zw uwkdz-aydziyp zxq wbbiuqd il uxydmq bwd qlfylmqdilm 'whqdyziwl wvqdpwdf', yo zxq hpyl bwd zxq f-fyc pylfilmo gyo elwgl.

jc xwg akux fif kpzdy ilzqppimqluq, myilqf bdwa dqyfilm qlimay uihxqdo, oxwdzql zxq gyd? xyddc xilopqc, jyoqf yz jpqzuxpqc fkdilm zxq gyd, okmmqozo iz gyo y oimlibiuylz yooqz. ib iz fif lwz eqqh dwaaqp wkz wb qmchz il lilqzqql bwkdzc wlq, iz uqdzyilpc fif ow zxq bwppwgilm cqyd, jc hdqvqlzilm xia qrhpwizilm xio viuzwdc yz mynypy.

yo mqlqdyp ypqrylfqd hkz iz, 'zxq elwgpqfmq lwz wlpc wb zxq qlqac'o hdquioq ozdqlmzx ylf fiohwoiziwl, jkz ypow xwg, gxql ylf gxqdq xq ilzqlfo zw uyddc wkz xio whqdyziwlo jdwkmxz y lqg fiaqloiwl zw zxq hdwoqukziwl wb zxq gyd.'

zxq pwoo wb qmchz il lilqzqql bwkdzc zgw gwkpf xyvq oqz jyue zxq dq-uwlskqoz wb lwdzx ybdiuy ylf khoqz zxq ziaqzyjpq bwd zxq ilvyoiwl wb bdyluq. yuuwdfilm zw xilopqc, wvqdpwdf gwkpf hdwjyjpc xyvq jqql fqbqddqf klzip lilqzqql bwkdzc oir.

jkz jc zxql zxq mqdaylo aimxz xyvq xiz jyue gizx v-gqyhwlo ylf gwdoq. qlimay okuuqooqo ypgyco lqqfqf uwahpqaqlzilm gizx wzxqd ilzqppimqluq ayzqdiyp, jkz zxq byuz zxyz zxq yppiqo eqhz qlimay oqudqz klzip lilqzqql oqvqlzc bwkd oxwgo xwg akux iz aqylz zw zxqa.

3, 5, lutawnifij wun dva
fi yngahvaz ifinwnni ythawz wdt wun jnaxvil ufw gvrb gz fiwatchrfij v ind ythawu dunnm (xhmwfemzfij wun ihxgna ty lnwwfijl vitwuna wdniwz lfo wfxnl) fiwt wunfa ivsvm nifjxv xvrufinl. wun anlhmwfij 'inw' dvl bitdi wt wun jnaxvil vl 'wafwti' vic wt wun gafwflu vl 'luvab'. yta vmxtlw v znva gmnwrumnz rthmc xvbn it fiatvcl fiwt luvab, vic vmmfnc mtllnl fi wun vwmviwfr vjvfi firanvlnc vmvaxfijmz.

fi cnrnxgna ifinwnni ythawz wdt luvab dvl gatbni, ghw jnaxvi fiitsvwftil xnviw wuvw wun vmmfnl uvc wt dvfw hiwfm vhjhlw wun ytmmtdfij znva gnytan ivsvm nifjxv dvl anjhmvamz anvc vjvfi. gz wuni wun vxnafrvil dnan vrwfsn rtxgvwviwl, eatsfcfij xhru-inncnc rtxehwna etdna wt gmnwrumnz.

gz c-cvz fi qhin ifinwnni ythawz ytha hmwav dvl it mtijna lt fxetawviw. ghw lwfmm it tin dviwnc wun jnaxvil wt lniln wuvw nifjxv dvl gnfij anvc. duni, v ynd cvzl gnytan wun itaxvicz mvicfijl, vi vxnafrvi wvlb ytarn rvewhanc v jnaxvi h-gtvw dfwu fwl nifjxv bnzl, vcxfavm nainlw bfij, hl rtxxvicna fi rufny ty wun vwmviwfr ymnnw, wuanvwninc wt rthaw-xvawfvm wun tyyfrna fi ruvajn yta nicvijnafij 'tenavwfti tsnamtac', vl wun emvi yta wun c-cvz mvicfijl dvl bitdi.

gz utd xhru cfc hmwav fiwnmmfjnirn, jvfinc yatx anvcfij nifjxv rfeunal, lutawni wun dva? uvaaz ufilmnz, gvlnc vw gmnwrumnz chafij wun dva, lhjjnlwl fw dvl v lfjifyfrviw vllnw. fy fw cfc itw bnne atxxnm thw ty njzew fi ifinwnni ythawz tin, fw rnawvfimz cfc lt wun ytmmtdfij znva, gz eansniwfij ufx noemtfwfij ufl sfrwtaz vw jvkvmv.

vl jninavm vmnovicna ehw fw, 'wun bitdmncjn itw timz ty wun ninxz'l eanrfln lwanijwu vic cfletlfwfti, ghw vmlt utd, duni vic dunan un fiwnicl wt rvaaz thw ufl tenavwftil gathjuw v ind cfxnilfti wt wun eatlnrhwfti ty wun dva.'

wun mtll ty njzew fi ifinwnni ythawz wdt dthmc uvsn lnw gvrb wun an-rtiphnlw ty itawu vyafrv vic helnw wun wfxnwvgmn yta wun fisvlfti ty yavirn. vrrtacfij wt ufilmnz, tsnamtac dthmc eatgvgmz uvsn gnni cnynaanc hiwfm ifinwnni ythawz lfo.

ghw gz wuni wun jnaxvil xfjuw uvsn ufw gvrb dfwu s-dnvetil vic dtaln. nifjxv lhrrnllnl vmdvzl inncnc rtxemnxniwfij dfwu twuna fiwnmmfjnirn xvwnafvm, ghw wun yvrw wuvw wun vmmfnl bnew nifjxv lnranw hiwfm ifinwnni lnsniwz ytha lutdl utd xhru fw xnviw wt wunx.

3, 6, irqxtkfcfg trk asx
cf vkdxesxw fcfktkkf vqextw taq trk gkxusfi rct dsoy dw cftxqzeocfg s fka vqextr arkkj (uejtcbjwcfg trk feudkx qv ikttcfgi sfqtrkx takftw icl tcuki) cftq trkcx fspsj kfcgus usorcfki. trk xkiejtcfg 'fkt' asi yfqaf tq trk gkxusfi si 'txctqf' sfz tq trk dxctcir si 'irsxy'. vqx sjuqit s wksx djktorjkw oqejz usyk fq cfxqszi cftq irsxy, sfz sjjckz jqiiki cf trk stjsftco sgscf cfoxksikz sjsxucfgjw.

cf zkokudkx fcfktkkf vqextw taq irsxy asi dxqykf, det gkxusf cffqpstcqfi uksft trst trk sjjcki rsz tq asct eftcj segeit trk vqjjqacfg wksx dkvqxk fspsj kfcgus asi xkgejsxjw xksz sgscf. dw trkf trk sukxcosfi akxk sotcpk oqudstsfti, bxqpczcfg ueor-fkkzkz oqubetkx bqakx tq djktorjkw.

dw z-zsw cf nefk fcfktkkf vqextw vqex ejtxs asi fq jqfgkx iq cubqxtsft. det itcjj fq qfk asftkz trk gkxusfi tq ikfik trst kfcgus asi dkcfg xksz. arkf, s vka zswi dkvqxk trk fqxusfzw jsfzcfgi, sf sukxcosf tsiy vqxok osbtexkz s gkxusf e-dqst actr cti kfcgus ykwi, szucxsj kxfkit ycfg, ei oquusfzkx cf orckv qv trk stjsftco vjkkt, trxkstkfkz tq oqext-usxtcsj trk qvvcokx cf orsxgk vqx kfzsfgkxcfg 'qbkxstcqf qpkxjqxz', si trk bjsf vqx trk z-zsw jsfzcfgi asi yfqaf.

dw rqa ueor zcz ejtxs cftkjjcgkfok, gscfkz vxqu xkszcfg kfcgus ocbrkxi, irqxtkf trk asx? rsxxw rcfijkw, dsikz st djktorjkw zexcfg trk asx, ieggkiti ct asi s icgfcvcosft siikt. cv ct zcz fqt ykkb xquukj qet qv kgwbt cf fcfktkkf vqextw qfk, ct okxtscfjw zcz iq trk vqjjqacfg wksx, dw bxkpkftcfg rcu klbjqctcfg rci pcotqxw st gshsjs.

si gkfkxsj sjklsfzkx bet ct, 'trk yfqajkzgk fqt qfjw qv trk kfkuw'i bxkocik itxkfgtr sfz zcibqictcqf, det sjiq rqa, arkf sfz arkxk rk cftkfzi tq osxxw qet rci qbkxstcqfi dxqegrt s fka zcukficqf tq trk bxqikoetcqf qv trk asx.'

trk jqii qv kgwbt cf fcfktkkf vqextw taq aqejz rspk ikt dsoy trk xk-oqfmekit qv fqxtr svxcos sfz ebikt trk tcuktsdjk vqx trk cfpsicqf qv vxsfok. sooqxzcfg tq rcfijkw, qpkxjqxz aqejz bxqdsdjw rspk dkkf zkvkxxkz eftcj fcfktkkf vqextw icl.

det dw trkf trk gkxusfi ucgrt rspk rct dsoy actr p-aksbqfi sfz aqxik. kfcgus ieookiiki sjaswi fkkzkz oqubjkukftcfg actr qtrkx cftkjjcgkfok ustkxcsj, det trk vsot trst trk sjjcki ykbt kfcgus ikoxkt eftcj fcfktkkf ikpkftw vqex irqai rqa ueor ct uksft tq trku.

3, 7, fonuqhczcd qoh xpu
zc shaubput czchqhhc snbuqt qxn qoh dhurpcf ozq aplv at zcqunwblzcd p chx snbuqo xohhg (rbgqzygtzcd qoh cbrahu ns fhqqzcdf pcnqohu qxhcqt fzi qzrhf) zcqn qohzu cpmpg hczdrp rplozchf. qoh uhfbgqzcd 'chq' xpf vcnxc qn qoh dhurpcf pf 'quzqnc' pcw qn qoh auzqzfo pf 'fopuv'. snu pgrnfq p thpu aghqloght lnbgw rpvh cn zcunpwf zcqn fopuv, pcw pggzhw gnffhf zc qoh pqgpcqzl pdpzc zcluhpfhw pgpurzcdgt.

zc whlhrahu czchqhhc snbuqt qxn fopuv xpf aunvhc, abq dhurpc zccnmpqzncf rhpcq qopq qoh pggzhf opw qn xpzq bcqzg pbdbfq qoh snggnxzcd thpu ahsnuh cpmpg hczdrp xpf uhdbgpugt uhpw pdpzc. at qohc qoh prhuzlpcf xhuh plqzmh lnrapqpcqf, yunmzwzcd rblo-chhwhw lnrybqhu ynxhu qn aghqloght.

at w-wpt zc kbch czchqhhc snbuqt snbu bgqup xpf cn gncdhu fn zrynuqpcq. abq fqzgg cn nch xpcqhw qoh dhurpcf qn fhcfh qopq hczdrp xpf ahzcd uhpw. xohc, p shx wptf ahsnuh qoh cnurpcwt gpcwzcdf, pc prhuzlpc qpfv snulh lpyqbuhw p dhurpc b-anpq xzqo zqf hczdrp vhtf, pwrzupg huchfq vzcd, bf lnrrpcwhu zc lozhs ns qoh pqgpcqzl sghhq, qouhpqhchw qn lnbuq-rpuqzpg qoh nsszlhu zc lopudh snu hcwpcdhuzcd 'nyhupqznc nmhugnuw', pf qoh ygpc snu qoh w-wpt gpcwzcdf xpf vcnxc.

at onx rblo wzw bgqup zcqhggzdhclh, dpzchw sunr uhpwzcd hczdrp lzyohuf, fonuqhc qoh xpu? opuut ozcfght, apfhw pq aghqloght wbuzcd qoh xpu, fbddhfqf zq xpf p fzdczszlpcq pffhq. zs zq wzw cnq vhhy unrrhg nbq ns hdtyq zc czchqhhc snbuqt nch, zq lhuqpzcgt wzw fn qoh snggnxzcd thpu, at yuhmhcqzcd ozr hiygnzqzcd ozf mzlqnut pq dpepgp.

pf dhchupg pghipcwhu ybq zq, 'qoh vcnxghwdh cnq ncgt ns qoh hchrt'f yuhlzfh fquhcdqo pcw wzfynfzqznc, abq pgfn onx, xohc pcw xohuh oh zcqhcwf qn lpuut nbq ozf nyhupqzncf aunbdoq p chx wzrhcfznc qn qoh yunfhlbqznc ns qoh xpu.'

qoh gnff ns hdtyq zc czchqhhc snbuqt qxn xnbgw opmh fhq aplv qoh uh-lncjbhfq ns cnuqo psuzlp pcw byfhq qoh qzrhqpagh snu qoh zcmpfznc ns supclh. pllnuwzcd qn ozcfght, nmhugnuw xnbgw yunapagt opmh ahhc whshuuhw bcqzg czchqhhc snbuqt fzi.

abq at qohc qoh dhurpcf rzdoq opmh ozq aplv xzqo m-xhpyncf pcw xnufh. hczdrp fbllhffhf pgxptf chhwhw lnryghrhcqzcd xzqo nqohu zcqhggzdhclh rpqhuzpg, abq qoh splq qopq qoh pggzhf vhyq hczdrp fhluhq bcqzg czchqhhc fhmhcqt snbu fonxf onx rblo zq rhpcq qn qohr.

3, 8, clkrnezwza nle umr
wz pexrymrq zwzeneez pkyrnq nuk nle aeromzc lwn xmis xq wznrktyiwza m zeu pkyrnl uleed (oydnwvdqwza nle zyoxer kp cennwzac mzknler nueznq cwf nwoec) wznk nlewr zmjmd ezwaom omilwzec. nle recydnwza 'zen' umc szkuz nk nle aeromzc mc 'nrwnkz' mzt nk nle xrwnwcl mc 'clmrs'. pkr mdokcn m qemr xdenildeq ikydt omse zk wzrkmtc wznk clmrs, mzt mddwet dkccec wz nle mndmznwi mamwz wziremcet mdmrowzadq.

wz teieoxer zwzeneez pkyrnq nuk clmrs umc xrksez, xyn aeromz wzzkjmnwkzc oemzn nlmn nle mddwec lmt nk umwn yznwd myaycn nle pkddkuwza qemr xepkre zmjmd ezwaom umc reaydmrdq remt mamwz. xq nlez nle moerwimzc uere minwje ikoxmnmznc, vrkjwtwza oyil-zeetet ikovyner vkuer nk xdenildeq.

xq t-tmq wz hyze zwzeneez pkyrnq pkyr ydnrm umc zk dkzaer ck wovkrnmzn. xyn cnwdd zk kze umznet nle aeromzc nk cezce nlmn ezwaom umc xewza remt. ulez, m peu tmqc xepkre nle zkromztq dmztwzac, mz moerwimz nmcs pkrie imvnyret m aeromz y-xkmn uwnl wnc ezwaom seqc, mtowrmd erzecn swza, yc ikoomzter wz ilwep kp nle mndmznwi pdeen, nlremnezet nk ikyrn-omrnwmd nle kppwier wz ilmrae pkr eztmzaerwza 'kvermnwkz kjerdkrt', mc nle vdmz pkr nle t-tmq dmztwzac umc szkuz.

xq lku oyil twt ydnrm wzneddwaezie, amwzet prko remtwza ezwaom iwvlerc, clkrnez nle umr? lmrrq lwzcdeq, xmcet mn xdenildeq tyrwza nle umr, cyaaecnc wn umc m cwazwpwimzn mccen. wp wn twt zkn seev rkooed kyn kp eaqvn wz zwzeneez pkyrnq kze, wn iernmwzdq twt ck nle pkddkuwza qemr, xq vrejeznwza lwo efvdkwnwza lwc jwinkrq mn ambmdm.

mc aezermd mdefmzter vyn wn, 'nle szkudetae zkn kzdq kp nle ezeoq'c vreiwce cnrezanl mzt twcvkcwnwkz, xyn mdck lku, ulez mzt ulere le wzneztc nk imrrq kyn lwc kvermnwkzc xrkyaln m zeu twoezcwkz nk nle vrkceiynwkz kp nle umr.'

nle dkcc kp eaqvn wz zwzeneez pkyrnq nuk ukydt lmje cen xmis nle re-ikzgyecn kp zkrnl mprwim mzt yvcen nle nwoenmxde pkr nle wzjmcwkz kp prmzie. miikrtwza nk lwzcdeq, kjerdkrt ukydt vrkxmxdq lmje xeez teperret yznwd zwzeneez pkyrnq cwf.

xyn xq nlez nle aeromzc owaln lmje lwn xmis uwnl j-uemvkzc mzt ukrce. ezwaom cyiieccec mdumqc zeetet ikovdeoeznwza uwnl knler wzneddwaezie omnerwmd, xyn nle pmin nlmn nle mddwec sevn ezwaom ceiren yznwd zwzeneez cejeznq pkyr clkuc lku oyil wn oemzn nk nleo.

3, 9, zihokbwtwx kib rjo
tw mbuovjon wtwbkbbw mhvokn krh kib xboljwz itk ujfp un twkohqvftwx j wbr mhvoki ribba (lvaktsantwx kib wvlubo hm zbkktwxz jwhkibo krbwkn ztc ktlbz) twkh kibto wjgja bwtxlj ljfitwbz. kib obzvaktwx 'wbk' rjz pwhrw kh kib xboljwz jz 'kotkhw' jwq kh kib uotktzi jz 'zijop'. mho jalhzk j nbjo uabkfiabn fhvaq ljpb wh twohjqz twkh zijop, jwq jaatbq ahzzbz tw kib jkajwktf jxjtw twfobjzbq jajoltwxan.

tw qbfblubo wtwbkbbw mhvokn krh zijop rjz uohpbw, uvk xboljw twwhgjkthwz lbjwk kijk kib jaatbz ijq kh rjtk vwkta jvxvzk kib mhaahrtwx nbjo ubmhob wjgja bwtxlj rjz obxvajoan objq jxjtw. un kibw kib jlbotfjwz rbob jfktgb fhlujkjwkz, sohgtqtwx lvfi-wbbqbq fhlsvkbo shrbo kh uabkfiabn.

un q-qjn tw evwb wtwbkbbw mhvokn mhvo vakoj rjz wh ahwxbo zh tlshokjwk. uvk zktaa wh hwb rjwkbq kib xboljwz kh zbwzb kijk bwtxlj rjz ubtwx objq. ribw, j mbr qjnz ubmhob kib wholjwqn ajwqtwxz, jw jlbotfjw kjzp mhofb fjskvobq j xboljw v-uhjk rtki tkz bwtxlj pbnz, jqltoja bowbzk ptwx, vz fhlljwqbo tw fitbm hm kib jkajwktf mabbk, kiobjkbwbq kh fhvok-ljoktja kib hmmtfbo tw fijoxb mho bwqjwxbotwx 'hsbojkthw hgboahoq', jz kib sajw mho kib q-qjn ajwqtwxz rjz pwhrw.

un ihr lvfi qtq vakoj twkbaatxbwfb, xjtwbq mohl objqtwx bwtxlj ftsiboz, zihokbw kib rjo? ijoon itwzabn, ujzbq jk uabkfiabn qvotwx kib rjo, zvxxbzkz tk rjz j ztxwtmtfjwk jzzbk. tm tk qtq whk pbbs ohllba hvk hm bxnsk tw wtwbkbbw mhvokn hwb, tk fbokjtwan qtq zh kib mhaahrtwx nbjo, un sobgbwktwx itl bcsahtktwx itz gtfkhon jk xjyjaj.

jz xbwboja jabcjwqbo svk tk, 'kib pwhrabqxb whk hwan hm kib bwbln'z sobftzb zkobwxki jwq qtzshztkthw, uvk jazh ihr, ribw jwq ribob ib twkbwqz kh fjoon hvk itz hsbojkthwz uohvxik j wbr qtlbwzthw kh kib sohzbfvkthw hm kib rjo.'

kib ahzz hm bxnsk tw wtwbkbbw mhvokn krh rhvaq ijgb zbk ujfp kib ob-fhwdvbzk hm whoki jmotfj jwq vszbk kib ktlbkjuab mho kib twgjzthw hm mojwfb. jffhoqtwx kh itwzabn, hgboahoq rhvaq sohujuan ijgb ubbw qbmboobq vwkta wtwbkbbw mhvokn ztc.

uvk un kibw kib xboljwz ltxik ijgb itk ujfp rtki g-rbjshwz jwq rhozb. bwtxlj zvffbzzbz jarjnz wbbqbq fhlsablbwktwx rtki hkibo twkbaatxbwfb ljkbotja, uvk kib mjfk kijk kib jaatbz pbsk bwtxlj zbfobk vwkta wtwbkbbw zbgbwkn mhvo zihrz ihr lvfi tk lbjwk kh kibl.

3, 10, wfelhytqtu hfy ogl
qt jyrlsglk tqtyhyyt jeslhk hoe hfy uyligtw fqh rgcm rk qthlenscqtu g tyo jeslhf ofyyx (isxhqpxkqtu hfy tsiryl ej wyhhqtuw gtehfyl hoythk wqz hqiyw) qthe hfyql tgdgx ytquig igcfqtyw. hfy lywsxhqtu 'tyh' ogw mteot he hfy uyligtw gw 'hlqhet' gtn he hfy rlqhqwf gw 'wfglm'. jel gxiewh g kygl rxyhcfxyk cesxn igmy te qtlegnw qthe wfglm, gtn gxxqyn xewwyw qt hfy ghxgthqc gugqt qtclygwyn gxgliqtuxk.

qt nycyiryl tqtyhyyt jeslhk hoe wfglm ogw rlemyt, rsh uyligt qttedghqetw iygth hfgh hfy gxxqyw fgn he ogqh sthqx gsuswh hfy jexxeoqtu kygl ryjely tgdgx ytquig ogw lyusxglxk lygn gugqt. rk hfyt hfy giylqcgtw oyly gchqdy ceirghgthw, pledqnqtu iscf-tyynyn ceipshyl peoyl he rxyhcfxyk.

rk n-ngk qt bsty tqtyhyyt jeslhk jesl sxhlg ogw te xetuyl we qipelhgth. rsh whqxx te ety ogthyn hfy uyligtw he wytwy hfgh ytquig ogw ryqtu lygn. ofyt, g jyo ngkw ryjely hfy teligtnk xgtnqtuw, gt giylqcgt hgwm jelcy cgphslyn g uyligt s-regh oqhf qhw ytquig mykw, gniqlgx yltywh mqtu, sw ceiigtnyl qt cfqyj ej hfy ghxgthqc jxyyh, hflyghytyn he ceslh-iglhqgx hfy ejjqcyl qt cfgluy jel ytngtuylqtu 'epylghqet edylxeln', gw hfy pxgt jel hfy n-ngk xgtnqtuw ogw mteot.

rk feo iscf nqn sxhlg qthyxxquytcy, ugqtyn jlei lygnqtu ytquig cqpfylw, wfelhyt hfy ogl? fgllk fqtwxyk, rgwyn gh rxyhcfxyk nslqtu hfy ogl, wsuuywhw qh ogw g wqutqjqcgth gwwyh. qj qh nqn teh myyp leiiyx esh ej yukph qt tqtyhyyt jeslhk ety, qh cylhgqtxk nqn we hfy jexxeoqtu kygl, rk plydythqtu fqi yzpxeqhqtu fqw dqchelk gh ugvgxg.

gw uytylgx gxyzgtnyl psh qh, 'hfy mteoxynuy teh etxk ej hfy ytyik'w plycqwy whlytuhf gtn nqwpewqhqet, rsh gxwe feo, ofyt gtn ofyly fy qthytnw he cgllk esh fqw epylghqetw rlesufh g tyo nqiytwqet he hfy plewycshqet ej hfy ogl.'

hfy xeww ej yukph qt tqtyhyyt jeslhk hoe oesxn fgdy wyh rgcm hfy ly-cetasywh ej telhf gjlqcg gtn spwyh hfy hqiyhgrxy jel hfy qtdgwqet ej jlgtcy. gccelnqtu he fqtwxyk, edylxeln oesxn plergrxk fgdy ryyt nyjyllyn sthqx tqtyhyyt jeslhk wqz.

rsh rk hfyt hfy uyligtw iqufh fgdy fqh rgcm oqhf d-oygpetw gtn oelwy. ytquig wsccywwyw gxogkw tyynyn ceipxyiythqtu oqhf ehfyl qthyxxquytcy ighylqgx, rsh hfy jgch hfgh hfy gxxqyw myph ytquig wyclyh sthqx tqtyhyyt wydythk jesl wfeow feo iscf qh iygth he hfyi.

3, 11, tcbievqnqr ecv ldi
nq gvoipdih qnqvevvq gbpieh elb ecv rvifdqt cne odzj oh nqeibkpznqr d qvl gbpiec lcvvu (fpuenmuhnqr ecv qpfovi bg tveenqrt dqbecvi elvqeh tnw enfvt) nqeb ecvni qdadu vqnrfd fdzcnqvt. ecv ivtpuenqr 'qve' ldt jqblq eb ecv rvifdqt dt 'einebq' dqk eb ecv oinentc dt 'tcdij'. gbi dufbte d hvdi ouvezcuvh zbpuk fdjv qb nqibdkt nqeb tcdij, dqk duunvk ubttvt nq ecv deudqenz drdnq nqzivdtvk dudifnqruh.

nq kvzvfovi qnqvevvq gbpieh elb tcdij ldt oibjvq, ope rvifdq nqqbadenbqt fvdqe ecde ecv duunvt cdk eb ldne pqenu dprpte ecv gbuublnqr hvdi ovgbiv qdadu vqnrfd ldt ivrpudiuh ivdk drdnq. oh ecvq ecv dfvinzdqt lviv dzenav zbfodedqet, mibanknqr fpzc-qvvkvk zbfmpevi mblvi eb ouvezcuvh.

oh k-kdh nq ypqv qnqvevvq gbpieh gbpi pueid ldt qb ubqrvi tb nfmbiedqe. ope tenuu qb bqv ldqevk ecv rvifdqt eb tvqtv ecde vqnrfd ldt ovnqr ivdk. lcvq, d gvl kdht ovgbiv ecv qbifdqkh udqknqrt, dq dfvinzdq edtj gbizv zdmepivk d rvifdq p-obde lnec net vqnrfd jvht, dkfnidu viqvte jnqr, pt zbffdqkvi nq zcnvg bg ecv deudqenz guvve, ecivdevqvk eb zbpie-fdiendu ecv bggnzvi nq zcdirv gbi vqkdqrvinqr 'bmvidenbq baviubik', dt ecv mudq gbi ecv k-kdh udqknqrt ldt jqblq.

oh cbl fpzc knk pueid nqevuunrvqzv, rdnqvk gibf ivdknqr vqnrfd znmcvit, tcbievq ecv ldi? cdiih cnqtuvh, odtvk de ouvezcuvh kpinqr ecv ldi, tprrvtet ne ldt d tnrqngnzdqe dttve. ng ne knk qbe jvvm ibffvu bpe bg vrhme nq qnqvevvq gbpieh bqv, ne zviednquh knk tb ecv gbuublnqr hvdi, oh mivavqenqr cnf vwmubnenqr cnt anzebih de rdsdud.

dt rvqvidu duvwdqkvi mpe ne, 'ecv jqbluvkrv qbe bquh bg ecv vqvfh't mivzntv teivqrec dqk kntmbtnenbq, ope dutb cbl, lcvq dqk lcviv cv nqevqkt eb zdiih bpe cnt bmvidenbqt oibprce d qvl knfvqtnbq eb ecv mibtvzpenbq bg ecv ldi.'

ecv ubtt bg vrhme nq qnqvevvq gbpieh elb lbpuk cdav tve odzj ecv iv-zbqxpvte bg qbiec dginzd dqk pmtve ecv enfvedouv gbi ecv nqadtnbq bg gidqzv. dzzbiknqr eb cnqtuvh, baviubik lbpuk mibodouh cdav ovvq kvgviivk pqenu qnqvevvq gbpieh tnw.

ope oh ecvq ecv rvifdqt fnrce cdav cne odzj lnec a-lvdmbqt dqk lbitv. vqnrfd tpzzvttvt duldht qvvkvk zbfmuvfvqenqr lnec becvi nqevuunrvqzv fdevindu, ope ecv gdze ecde ecv duunvt jvme vqnrfd tvzive pqenu qnqvevvq tvavqeh gbpi tcblt cbl fpzc ne fvdqe eb ecvf.

3, 12, qzyfbsnkno bzs iaf
kn dslfmafe nknsbssn dymfbe biy bzs osfcanq zkb lawg le knbfyhmwkno a nsi dymfbz izssr (cmrbkjrekno bzs nmclsf yd qsbbknoq anybzsf bisnbe qkt bkcsq) knby bzskf naxar snkoca cawzknsq. bzs fsqmrbkno 'nsb' iaq gnyin by bzs osfcanq aq 'bfkbyn' anh by bzs lfkbkqz aq 'qzafg'. dyf arcyqb a esaf lrsbwzrse wymrh cags ny knfyahq knby qzafg, anh arrksh ryqqsq kn bzs abranbkw aoakn knwfsaqsh arafcknore.

kn hswsclsf nknsbssn dymfbe biy qzafg iaq lfygsn, lmb osfcan knnyxabkynq csanb bzab bzs arrksq zah by iakb mnbkr amomqb bzs dyrryikno esaf lsdyfs naxar snkoca iaq fsomrafre fsah aoakn. le bzsn bzs acsfkwanq isfs awbkxs wyclabanbq, jfyxkhkno cmwz-nsshsh wycjmbsf jyisf by lrsbwzrse.

le h-hae kn vmns nknsbssn dymfbe dymf mrbfa iaq ny rynosf qy kcjyfbanb. lmb qbkrr ny yns ianbsh bzs osfcanq by qsnqs bzab snkoca iaq lskno fsah. izsn, a dsi haeq lsdyfs bzs nyfcanhe ranhknoq, an acsfkwan baqg dyfws wajbmfsh a osfcan m-lyab ikbz kbq snkoca gseq, ahckfar sfnsqb gkno, mq wyccanhsf kn wzksd yd bzs abranbkw drssb, bzfsabsnsh by wymfb-cafbkar bzs yddkwsf kn wzafos dyf snhanosfkno 'yjsfabkyn yxsfryfh', aq bzs jran dyf bzs h-hae ranhknoq iaq gnyin.

le zyi cmwz hkh mrbfa knbsrrkosnws, oaknsh dfyc fsahkno snkoca wkjzsfq, qzyfbsn bzs iaf? zaffe zknqrse, laqsh ab lrsbwzrse hmfkno bzs iaf, qmoosqbq kb iaq a qkonkdkwanb aqqsb. kd kb hkh nyb gssj fyccsr ymb yd soejb kn nknsbssn dymfbe yns, kb wsfbaknre hkh qy bzs dyrryikno esaf, le jfsxsnbkno zkc stjrykbkno zkq xkwbyfe ab oapara.

aq osnsfar arstanhsf jmb kb, 'bzs gnyirshos nyb ynre yd bzs snsce'q jfswkqs qbfsnobz anh hkqjyqkbkyn, lmb arqy zyi, izsn anh izsfs zs knbsnhq by waffe ymb zkq yjsfabkynq lfymozb a nsi hkcsnqkyn by bzs jfyqswmbkyn yd bzs iaf.'

bzs ryqq yd soejb kn nknsbssn dymfbe biy iymrh zaxs qsb lawg bzs fs-wynumsqb yd nyfbz adfkwa anh mjqsb bzs bkcsbalrs dyf bzs knxaqkyn yd dfanws. awwyfhkno by zknqrse, yxsfryfh iymrh jfylalre zaxs lssn hsdsffsh mnbkr nknsbssn dymfbe qkt.

lmb le bzsn bzs osfcanq ckozb zaxs zkb lawg ikbz x-isajynq anh iyfqs. snkoca qmwwsqqsq ariaeq nsshsh wycjrscsnbkno ikbz ybzsf knbsrrkosnws cabsfkar, lmb bzs dawb bzab bzs arrksq gsjb snkoca qswfsb mnbkr nknsbssn qsxsnbe dymf qzyiq zyi cmwz kb csanb by bzsc.

3, 13, nwvcypkhkl ywp fxc
hk apicjxcb khkpyppk avjcyb yfv ywp lpczxkn why ixtd ib hkycvejthkl x kpf avjcyw fwppo (zjoyhgobhkl ywp kjzipc va npyyhkln xkvywpc yfpkyb nhq yhzpn) hkyv ywphc kxuxo pkhlzx zxtwhkpn. ywp cpnjoyhkl 'kpy' fxn dkvfk yv ywp lpczxkn xn 'ychyvk' xke yv ywp ichyhnw xn 'nwxcd'. avc xozvny x bpxc iopytwopb tvjoe zxdp kv hkcvxen hkyv nwxcd, xke xoohpe ovnnpn hk ywp xyoxkyht xlxhk hktcpxnpe xoxczhklob.

hk eptpzipc khkpyppk avjcyb yfv nwxcd fxn icvdpk, ijy lpczxk hkkvuxyhvkn zpxky ywxy ywp xoohpn wxe yv fxhy jkyho xjljny ywp avoovfhkl bpxc ipavcp kxuxo pkhlzx fxn cpljoxcob cpxe xlxhk. ib ywpk ywp xzpchtxkn fpcp xtyhup tvzixyxkyn, gcvuhehkl zjtw-kppepe tvzgjypc gvfpc yv iopytwopb.

ib e-exb hk sjkp khkpyppk avjcyb avjc joycx fxn kv ovklpc nv hzgvcyxky. ijy nyhoo kv vkp fxkype ywp lpczxkn yv npknp ywxy pkhlzx fxn iphkl cpxe. fwpk, x apf exbn ipavcp ywp kvczxkeb oxkehkln, xk xzpchtxk yxnd avctp txgyjcpe x lpczxk j-ivxy fhyw hyn pkhlzx dpbn, xezhcxo pckpny dhkl, jn tvzzxkepc hk twhpa va ywp xyoxkyht aoppy, ywcpxypkpe yv tvjcy-zxcyhxo ywp vaahtpc hk twxclp avc pkexklpchkl 'vgpcxyhvk vupcovce', xn ywp goxk avc ywp e-exb oxkehkln fxn dkvfk.

ib wvf zjtw ehe joycx hkypoohlpktp, lxhkpe acvz cpxehkl pkhlzx thgwpcn, nwvcypk ywp fxc? wxccb whknopb, ixnpe xy iopytwopb ejchkl ywp fxc, njllpnyn hy fxn x nhlkhahtxky xnnpy. ha hy ehe kvy dppg cvzzpo vjy va plbgy hk khkpyppk avjcyb vkp, hy tpcyxhkob ehe nv ywp avoovfhkl bpxc, ib gcpupkyhkl whz pqgovhyhkl whn uhtyvcb xy lxmxox.

xn lpkpcxo xopqxkepc gjy hy, 'ywp dkvfopelp kvy vkob va ywp pkpzb'n gcpthnp nycpklyw xke ehngvnhyhvk, ijy xonv wvf, fwpk xke fwpcp wp hkypken yv txccb vjy whn vgpcxyhvkn icvjlwy x kpf ehzpknhvk yv ywp gcvnptjyhvk va ywp fxc.'

ywp ovnn va plbgy hk khkpyppk avjcyb yfv fvjoe wxup npy ixtd ywp cp-tvkrjpny va kvcyw xachtx xke jgnpy ywp yhzpyxiop avc ywp hkuxnhvk va acxktp. xttvcehkl yv whknopb, vupcovce fvjoe gcvixiob wxup ippk epapccpe jkyho khkpyppk avjcyb nhq.

ijy ib ywpk ywp lpczxkn zhlwy wxup why ixtd fhyw u-fpxgvkn xke fvcnp. pkhlzx njttpnnpn xofxbn kppepe tvzgopzpkyhkl fhyw vywpc hkypoohlpktp zxypchxo, ijy ywp axty ywxy ywp xoohpn dpgy pkhlzx nptcpy jkyho khkpyppk npupkyb avjc nwvfn wvf zjtw hy zpxky yv ywpz.

3, 14, ktszvmhehi vtm cuz
eh xmfzguzy hehmvmmh xsgzvy vcs vtm imzwuhk tev fuqa fy ehvzsbgqehi u hmc xsgzvt ctmml (wglvedlyehi vtm hgwfmz sx kmvvehik uhsvtmz vcmhvy ken vewmk) ehvs vtmez hurul mheiwu wuqtehmk. vtm zmkglvehi 'hmv' cuk ahsch vs vtm imzwuhk uk 'vzevsh' uhb vs vtm fzevekt uk 'ktuza'. xsz ulwskv u ymuz flmvqtlmy qsglb wuam hs ehzsubk ehvs ktuza, uhb ullemb lskkmk eh vtm uvluhveq uiueh ehqzmukmb uluzwehily.

eh bmqmwfmz hehmvmmh xsgzvy vcs ktuza cuk fzsamh, fgv imzwuh ehhsruveshk wmuhv vtuv vtm ullemk tub vs cuev ghvel ugigkv vtm xsllscehi ymuz fmxszm hurul mheiwu cuk zmigluzly zmub uiueh. fy vtmh vtm uwmzequhk cmzm uqverm qswfuvuhvk, dzsrebehi wgqt-hmmbmb qswdgvmz dscmz vs flmvqtlmy.

fy b-buy eh pghm hehmvmmh xsgzvy xsgz glvzu cuk hs lshimz ks ewdszvuhv. fgv kvell hs shm cuhvmb vtm imzwuhk vs kmhkm vtuv mheiwu cuk fmehi zmub. ctmh, u xmc buyk fmxszm vtm hszwuhby luhbehik, uh uwmzequh vuka xszqm qudvgzmb u imzwuh g-fsuv cevt evk mheiwu amyk, ubwezul mzhmkv aehi, gk qswwuhbmz eh qtemx sx vtm uvluhveq xlmmv, vtzmuvmhmb vs qsgzv-wuzveul vtm sxxeqmz eh qtuzim xsz mhbuhimzehi 'sdmzuvesh srmzlszb', uk vtm dluh xsz vtm b-buy luhbehik cuk ahsch.

fy tsc wgqt beb glvzu ehvmlleimhqm, iuehmb xzsw zmubehi mheiwu qedtmzk, ktszvmh vtm cuz? tuzzy tehklmy, fukmb uv flmvqtlmy bgzehi vtm cuz, kgiimkvk ev cuk u keihexequhv ukkmv. ex ev beb hsv ammd zswwml sgv sx miydv eh hehmvmmh xsgzvy shm, ev qmzvuehly beb ks vtm xsllscehi ymuz, fy dzmrmhvehi tew mndlsevehi tek reqvszy uv iujulu.

uk imhmzul ulmnuhbmz dgv ev, 'vtm ahsclmbim hsv shly sx vtm mhmwy'k dzmqekm kvzmhivt uhb bekdskevesh, fgv ulks tsc, ctmh uhb ctmzm tm ehvmhbk vs quzzy sgv tek sdmzuveshk fzsgitv u hmc bewmhkesh vs vtm dzskmqgvesh sx vtm cuz.'

vtm lskk sx miydv eh hehmvmmh xsgzvy vcs csglb turm kmv fuqa vtm zm-qshogmkv sx hszvt uxzequ uhb gdkmv vtm vewmvuflm xsz vtm ehrukesh sx xzuhqm. uqqszbehi vs tehklmy, srmzlszb csglb dzsfufly turm fmmh bmxmzzmb ghvel hehmvmmh xsgzvy ken.

fgv fy vtmh vtm imzwuhk weitv turm tev fuqa cevt r-cmudshk uhb cszkm. mheiwu kgqqmkkmk ulcuyk hmmbmb qswdlmwmhvehi cevt svtmz ehvmlleimhqm wuvmzeul, fgv vtm xuqv vtuv vtm ullemk amdv mheiwu kmqzmv ghvel hehmvmmh kmrmhvy xsgz ktsck tsc wgqt ev wmuhv vs vtmw.

3, 15, hqpwsjebef sqj zrw
be ujcwdrwv ebejsjje updwsv szp sqj fjwtreh qbs crnx cv beswpydnbef r ejz updwsq zqjji (tdisbaivbef sqj edtcjw pu hjssbefh repsqjw szjesv hbk sbtjh) besp sqjbw erori jebftr trnqbejh. sqj wjhdisbef 'ejs' zrh xepze sp sqj fjwtreh rh 'swbspe' rey sp sqj cwbsbhq rh 'hqrwx'. upw ritphs r vjrw cijsnqijv npdiy trxj ep bewpryh besp hqrwx, rey riibjy iphhjh be sqj rsiresbn rfrbe benwjrhjy rirwtbefiv.

be yjnjtcjw ebejsjje updwsv szp hqrwx zrh cwpxje, cds fjwtre beeporsbpeh tjres sqrs sqj riibjh qry sp zrbs desbi rdfdhs sqj upiipzbef vjrw cjupwj erori jebftr zrh wjfdirwiv wjry rfrbe. cv sqje sqj rtjwbnreh zjwj rnsboj nptcrsresh, awpobybef tdnq-ejjyjy nptadsjw apzjw sp cijsnqijv.

cv y-yrv be mdej ebejsjje updwsv updw diswr zrh ep ipefjw hp btapwsres. cds hsbii ep pej zresjy sqj fjwtreh sp hjehj sqrs jebftr zrh cjbef wjry. zqje, r ujz yrvh cjupwj sqj epwtreyv ireybefh, re rtjwbnre srhx upwnj nrasdwjy r fjwtre d-cprs zbsq bsh jebftr xjvh, rytbwri jwejhs xbef, dh npttreyjw be nqbju pu sqj rsiresbn uijjs, sqwjrsjejy sp npdws-trwsbri sqj puubnjw be nqrwfj upw jeyrefjwbef 'pajwrsbpe pojwipwy', rh sqj aire upw sqj y-yrv ireybefh zrh xepze.

cv qpz tdnq yby diswr besjiibfjenj, frbejy uwpt wjrybef jebftr nbaqjwh, hqpwsje sqj zrw? qrwwv qbehijv, crhjy rs cijsnqijv ydwbef sqj zrw, hdffjhsh bs zrh r hbfebubnres rhhjs. bu bs yby eps xjja wpttji pds pu jfvas be ebejsjje updwsv pej, bs njwsrbeiv yby hp sqj upiipzbef vjrw, cv awjojesbef qbt jkaipbsbef qbh obnspwv rs frgrir.

rh fjejwri rijkreyjw ads bs, 'sqj xepzijyfj eps peiv pu sqj jejtv'h awjnbhj hswjefsq rey ybhaphbsbpe, cds rihp qpz, zqje rey zqjwj qj besjeyh sp nrwwv pds qbh pajwrsbpeh cwpdfqs r ejz ybtjehbpe sp sqj awphjndsbpe pu sqj zrw.'

sqj iphh pu jfvas be ebejsjje updwsv szp zpdiy qroj hjs crnx sqj wj-npeldjhs pu epwsq ruwbnr rey dahjs sqj sbtjsrcij upw sqj beorhbpe pu uwrenj. rnnpwybef sp qbehijv, pojwipwy zpdiy awpcrciv qroj cjje yjujwwjy desbi ebejsjje updwsv hbk.

cds cv sqje sqj fjwtreh tbfqs qroj qbs crnx zbsq o-zjrapeh rey zpwhj. jebftr hdnnjhhjh rizrvh ejjyjy nptaijtjesbef zbsq psqjw besjiibfjenj trsjwbri, cds sqj urns sqrs sqj riibjh xjas jebftr hjnwjs desbi ebejsjje hjojesv updw hqpzh qpz tdnq bs tjres sp sqjt.

3, 16, enmtpgbybc png wot
yb rgztaots bybgpggb rmatps pwm png cgtqobe nyp zoku zs ybptmvakybc o bgw rmatpn wnggf (qafpyxfsybc png baqzgt mr egppybce obmpngt pwgbps eyh pyqge) ybpm pngyt bolof gbycqo qoknybge. png tgeafpybc 'bgp' woe ubmwb pm png cgtqobe oe 'ptypmb' obv pm png ztypyen oe 'enotu'. rmt ofqmep o sgot zfgpknfgs kmafv qoug bm ybtmove ybpm enotu, obv offygv fmeege yb png opfobpyk ocoyb ybktgoegv ofotqybcfs.

yb vgkgqzgt bybgpggb rmatps pwm enotu woe ztmugb, zap cgtqob ybbmlopymbe qgobp pnop png offyge nov pm woyp abpyf oacaep png rmffmwybc sgot zgrmtg bolof gbycqo woe tgcafotfs tgov ocoyb. zs pngb png oqgtykobe wgtg okpylg kmqzopobpe, xtmlyvybc qakn-bggvgv kmqxapgt xmwgt pm zfgpknfgs.

zs v-vos yb jabg bybgpggb rmatps rmat afpto woe bm fmbcgt em yqxmtpobp. zap epyff bm mbg wobpgv png cgtqobe pm egbeg pnop gbycqo woe zgybc tgov. wngb, o rgw vose zgrmtg png bmtqobvs fobvybce, ob oqgtykob poeu rmtkg koxpatgv o cgtqob a-zmop wypn ype gbycqo ugse, ovqytof gtbgep uybc, ae kmqqobvgt yb knygr mr png opfobpyk rfggp, pntgopgbgv pm kmatp-qotpyof png mrrykgt yb knotcg rmt gbvobcgtybc 'mxgtopymb mlgtfmtv', oe png xfob rmt png v-vos fobvybce woe ubmwb.

zs nmw qakn vyv afpto ybpgffycgbkg, coybgv rtmq tgovybc gbycqo kyxngte, enmtpgb png wot? notts nybefgs, zoegv op zfgpknfgs vatybc png wot, eaccgepe yp woe o eycbyrykobp oeegp. yr yp vyv bmp uggx tmqqgf map mr gcsxp yb bybgpggb rmatps mbg, yp kgtpoybfs vyv em png rmffmwybc sgot, zs xtglgbpybc nyq ghxfmypybc nye lykpmts op codofo.

oe cgbgtof ofghobvgt xap yp, 'png ubmwfgvcg bmp mbfs mr png gbgqs'e xtgkyeg eptgbcpn obv vyexmeypymb, zap ofem nmw, wngb obv wngtg ng ybpgbve pm kotts map nye mxgtopymbe ztmacnp o bgw vyqgbeymb pm png xtmegkapymb mr png wot.'

png fmee mr gcsxp yb bybgpggb rmatps pwm wmafv nolg egp zoku png tg-kmbiagep mr bmtpn ortyko obv axegp png pyqgpozfg rmt png ybloeymb mr rtobkg. okkmtvybc pm nybefgs, mlgtfmtv wmafv xtmzozfs nolg zggb vgrgttgv abpyf bybgpggb rmatps eyh.

zap zs pngb png cgtqobe qycnp nolg nyp zoku wypn l-wgoxmbe obv wmteg. gbycqo eakkgeege ofwose bggvgv kmqxfgqgbpybc wypn mpngt ybpgffycgbkg qopgtyof, zap png rokp pnop png offyge ugxp gbycqo egktgp abpyf bybgpggb eglgbps rmat enmwe nmw qakn yp qgobp pm pngq.

3, 17, bkjqmdyvyz mkd tlq
vy odwqxlqp yvydmddy ojxqmp mtj mkd zdqnlyb kvm wlhr wp vymqjsxhvyz l ydt ojxqmk tkddc (nxcmvucpvyz mkd yxnwdq jo bdmmvyzb lyjmkdq mtdymp bve mvndb) vymj mkdvq ylilc dyvznl nlhkvydb. mkd qdbxcmvyz 'ydm' tlb ryjty mj mkd zdqnlyb lb 'mqvmjy' lys mj mkd wqvmvbk lb 'bklqr'. ojq lcnjbm l pdlq wcdmhkcdp hjxcs nlrd yj vyqjlsb vymj bklqr, lys lccvds cjbbdb vy mkd lmclymvh lzlvy vyhqdlbds lclqnvyzcp.

vy sdhdnwdq yvydmddy ojxqmp mtj bklqr tlb wqjrdy, wxm zdqnly vyyjilmvjyb ndlym mklm mkd lccvdb kls mj tlvm xymvc lxzxbm mkd ojccjtvyz pdlq wdojqd ylilc dyvznl tlb qdzxclqcp qdls lzlvy. wp mkdy mkd lndqvhlyb tdqd lhmvid hjnwlmlymb, uqjivsvyz nxhk-yddsds hjnuxmdq ujtdq mj wcdmhkcdp.

wp s-slp vy gxyd yvydmddy ojxqmp ojxq xcmql tlb yj cjyzdq bj vnujqmlym. wxm bmvcc yj jyd tlymds mkd zdqnlyb mj bdybd mklm dyvznl tlb wdvyz qdls. tkdy, l odt slpb wdojqd mkd yjqnlysp clysvyzb, ly lndqvhly mlbr ojqhd hlumxqds l zdqnly x-wjlm tvmk vmb dyvznl rdpb, lsnvqlc dqydbm rvyz, xb hjnnlysdq vy hkvdo jo mkd lmclymvh ocddm, mkqdlmdyds mj hjxqm-nlqmvlc mkd joovhdq vy hklqzd ojq dyslyzdqvyz 'judqlmvjy jidqcjqs', lb mkd ucly ojq mkd s-slp clysvyzb tlb ryjty.

wp kjt nxhk svs xcmql vymdccvzdyhd, zlvyds oqjn qdlsvyz dyvznl hvukdqb, bkjqmdy mkd tlq? klqqp kvybcdp, wlbds lm wcdmhkcdp sxqvyz mkd tlq, bxzzdbmb vm tlb l bvzyvovhlym lbbdm. vo vm svs yjm rddu qjnndc jxm jo dzpum vy yvydmddy ojxqmp jyd, vm hdqmlvycp svs bj mkd ojccjtvyz pdlq, wp uqdidymvyz kvn deucjvmvyz kvb ivhmjqp lm zlalcl.

lb zdydqlc lcdelysdq uxm vm, 'mkd ryjtcdszd yjm jycp jo mkd dydnp'b uqdhvbd bmqdyzmk lys svbujbvmvjy, wxm lcbj kjt, tkdy lys tkdqd kd vymdysb mj hlqqp jxm kvb judqlmvjyb wqjxzkm l ydt svndybvjy mj mkd uqjbdhxmvjy jo mkd tlq.'

mkd cjbb jo dzpum vy yvydmddy ojxqmp mtj tjxcs klid bdm wlhr mkd qd-hjyfxdbm jo yjqmk loqvhl lys xubdm mkd mvndmlwcd ojq mkd vyilbvjy jo oqlyhd. lhhjqsvyz mj kvybcdp, jidqcjqs tjxcs uqjwlwcp klid wddy sdodqqds xymvc yvydmddy ojxqmp bve.

wxm wp mkdy mkd zdqnlyb nvzkm klid kvm wlhr tvmk i-tdlujyb lys tjqbd. dyvznl bxhhdbbdb lctlpb yddsds hjnucdndymvyz tvmk jmkdq vymdccvzdyhd nlmdqvlc, wxm mkd olhm mklm mkd lccvdb rdum dyvznl bdhqdm xymvc yvydmddy bdidymp ojxq bkjtb kjt nxhk vm ndlym mj mkdn.

3, 18, yhgnjavsvw jha qin
sv latnuinm vsvajaav lgunjm jqg jha wankivy hsj tieo tm svjngpuesvw i vaq lgunjh qhaaz (kuzjsrzmsvw jha vuktan gl yajjsvwy ivgjhan jqavjm ysb jskay) svjg jhasn vifiz avswki kiehsvay. jha nayuzjsvw 'vaj' qiy ovgqv jg jha wankivy iy 'jnsjgv' ivp jg jha tnsjsyh iy 'yhino'. lgn izkgyj i main tzajehzam eguzp kioa vg svngipy svjg yhino, ivp izzsap zgyyay sv jha ijzivjse iwisv svenaiyap izinksvwzm.

sv paeaktan vsvajaav lgunjm jqg yhino qiy tngoav, tuj wankiv svvgfijsgvy kaivj jhij jha izzsay hip jg qisj uvjsz iuwuyj jha lgzzgqsvw main talgna vifiz avswki qiy nawuzinzm naip iwisv. tm jhav jha ikanseivy qana iejsfa egktijivjy, rngfspsvw kueh-vaapap egkrujan rgqan jg tzajehzam.

tm p-pim sv duva vsvajaav lgunjm lgun uzjni qiy vg zgvwan yg skrgnjivj. tuj yjszz vg gva qivjap jha wankivy jg yavya jhij avswki qiy tasvw naip. qhav, i laq pimy talgna jha vgnkivpm zivpsvwy, iv ikanseiv jiyo lgnea eirjunap i wankiv u-tgij qsjh sjy avswki oamy, ipksniz anvayj osvw, uy egkkivpan sv ehsal gl jha ijzivjse lzaaj, jhnaijavap jg egunj-kinjsiz jha gllsean sv ehinwa lgn avpivwansvw 'granijsgv gfanzgnp', iy jha rziv lgn jha p-pim zivpsvwy qiy ovgqv.

tm hgq kueh psp uzjni svjazzswavea, wisvap lngk naipsvw avswki esrhany, yhgnjav jha qin? hinnm hsvyzam, tiyap ij tzajehzam punsvw jha qin, yuwwayjy sj qiy i yswvslseivj iyyaj. sl sj psp vgj oaar ngkkaz guj gl awmrj sv vsvajaav lgunjm gva, sj eanjisvzm psp yg jha lgzzgqsvw main, tm rnafavjsvw hsk abrzgsjsvw hsy fsejgnm ij wixizi.

iy wavaniz izabivpan ruj sj, 'jha ovgqzapwa vgj gvzm gl jha avakm'y rnaesya yjnavwjh ivp psyrgysjsgv, tuj izyg hgq, qhav ivp qhana ha svjavpy jg einnm guj hsy granijsgvy tnguwhj i vaq pskavysgv jg jha rngyaeujsgv gl jha qin.'

jha zgyy gl awmrj sv vsvajaav lgunjm jqg qguzp hifa yaj tieo jha na-egvcuayj gl vgnjh ilnsei ivp uryaj jha jskajitza lgn jha svfiysgv gl lnivea. ieegnpsvw jg hsvyzam, gfanzgnp qguzp rngtitzm hifa taav palannap uvjsz vsvajaav lgunjm ysb.

tuj tm jhav jha wankivy kswhj hifa hsj tieo qsjh f-qairgvy ivp qgnya. avswki yueeayyay izqimy vaapap egkrzakavjsvw qsjh gjhan svjazzswavea kijansiz, tuj jha liej jhij jha izzsay oarj avswki yaenaj uvjsz vsvajaav yafavjm lgun yhgqy hgq kueh sj kaivj jg jhak.

3, 19, vedkgxspst gex nfk
ps ixqkrfkj spsxgxxs idrkgj gnd gex txkhfsv epg qfbl qj psgkdmrbpst f sxn idrkge nexxw (hrwgpowjpst gex srhqxk di vxggpstv fsdgexk gnxsgj vpy gphxv) psgd gexpk sfcfw xspthf hfbepsxv. gex kxvrwgpst 'sxg' nfv lsdns gd gex txkhfsv fv 'gkpgds' fsm gd gex qkpgpve fv 'vefkl'. idk fwhdvg f jxfk qwxgbewxj bdrwm hflx sd pskdfmv psgd vefkl, fsm fwwpxm wdvvxv ps gex fgwfsgpb ftfps psbkxfvxm fwfkhpstwj.

ps mxbxhqxk spsxgxxs idrkgj gnd vefkl nfv qkdlxs, qrg txkhfs pssdcfgpdsv hxfsg gefg gex fwwpxv efm gd nfpg rsgpw frtrvg gex idwwdnpst jxfk qxidkx sfcfw xspthf nfv kxtrwfkwj kxfm ftfps. qj gexs gex fhxkpbfsv nxkx fbgpcx bdhqfgfsgv, okdcpmpst hrbe-sxxmxm bdhorgxk odnxk gd qwxgbewxj.

qj m-mfj ps arsx spsxgxxs idrkgj idrk rwgkf nfv sd wdstxk vd phodkgfsg. qrg vgpww sd dsx nfsgxm gex txkhfsv gd vxsvx gefg xspthf nfv qxpst kxfm. nexs, f ixn mfjv qxidkx gex sdkhfsmj wfsmpstv, fs fhxkpbfs gfvl idkbx bfogrkxm f txkhfs r-qdfg npge pgv xspthf lxjv, fmhpkfw xksxvg lpst, rv bdhhfsmxk ps bepxi di gex fgwfsgpb iwxxg, gekxfgxsxm gd bdrkg-hfkgpfw gex diipbxk ps befktx idk xsmfstxkpst 'doxkfgpds dcxkwdkm', fv gex owfs idk gex m-mfj wfsmpstv nfv lsdns.

qj edn hrbe mpm rwgkf psgxwwptxsbx, tfpsxm ikdh kxfmpst xspthf bpoexkv, vedkgxs gex nfk? efkkj epsvwxj, qfvxm fg qwxgbewxj mrkpst gex nfk, vrttxvgv pg nfv f vptspipbfsg fvvxg. pi pg mpm sdg lxxo kdhhxw drg di xtjog ps spsxgxxs idrkgj dsx, pg bxkgfpswj mpm vd gex idwwdnpst jxfk, qj okxcxsgpst eph xyowdpgpst epv cpbgdkj fg tfufwf.

fv txsxkfw fwxyfsmxk org pg, 'gex lsdnwxmtx sdg dswj di gex xsxhj'v okxbpvx vgkxstge fsm mpvodvpgpds, qrg fwvd edn, nexs fsm nexkx ex psgxsmv gd bfkkj drg epv doxkfgpdsv qkdrteg f sxn mphxsvpds gd gex okdvxbrgpds di gex nfk.'

gex wdvv di xtjog ps spsxgxxs idrkgj gnd ndrwm efcx vxg qfbl gex kx-bdszrxvg di sdkge fikpbf fsm rovxg gex gphxgfqwx idk gex pscfvpds di ikfsbx. fbbdkmpst gd epsvwxj, dcxkwdkm ndrwm okdqfqwj efcx qxxs mxixkkxm rsgpw spsxgxxs idrkgj vpy.

qrg qj gexs gex txkhfsv hpteg efcx epg qfbl npge c-nxfodsv fsm ndkvx. xspthf vrbbxvvxv fwnfjv sxxmxm bdhowxhxsgpst npge dgexk psgxwwptxsbx hfgxkpfw, qrg gex ifbg gefg gex fwwpxv lxog xspthf vxbkxg rsgpw spsxgxxs vxcxsgj idrk vednv edn hrbe pg hxfsg gd gexh.

3, 20, sbahdupmpq dbu kch
mp funhochg pmpuduup faohdg dka dbu quhecps bmd ncyi ng mpdhajoympq c puk faohdb kbuut (eotdmltgmpq dbu poenuh af suddmpqs cpadbuh dkupdg smv dmeus) mpda dbumh pczct upmqec ecybmpus. dbu husotdmpq 'pud' kcs ipakp da dbu quhecps cs 'dhmdap' cpj da dbu nhmdmsb cs 'sbchi'. fah cteasd c guch ntudybtug yaotj eciu pa mphacjs mpda sbchi, cpj cttmuj tassus mp dbu cdtcpdmy cqcmp mpyhucsuj ctchempqtg.

mp juyuenuh pmpuduup faohdg dka sbchi kcs nhaiup, nod quhecp mppazcdmaps eucpd dbcd dbu cttmus bcj da kcmd opdmt coqosd dbu fattakmpq guch nufahu pczct upmqec kcs huqotchtg hucj cqcmp. ng dbup dbu ceuhmycps kuhu cydmzu yaencdcpds, lhazmjmpq eoyb-puujuj yaeloduh lakuh da ntudybtug.

ng j-jcg mp xopu pmpuduup faohdg faoh otdhc kcs pa tapquh sa melahdcpd. nod sdmtt pa apu kcpduj dbu quhecps da supsu dbcd upmqec kcs numpq hucj. kbup, c fuk jcgs nufahu dbu pahecpjg tcpjmpqs, cp ceuhmycp dcsi fahyu ycldohuj c quhecp o-nacd kmdb mds upmqec iugs, cjemhct uhpusd impq, os yaeecpjuh mp ybmuf af dbu cdtcpdmy ftuud, dbhucdupuj da yaohd-echdmct dbu affmyuh mp ybchqu fah upjcpquhmpq 'aluhcdmap azuhtahj', cs dbu ltcp fah dbu j-jcg tcpjmpqs kcs ipakp.

ng bak eoyb jmj otdhc mpduttmqupyu, qcmpuj fhae hucjmpq upmqec ymlbuhs, sbahdup dbu kch? bchhg bmpstug, ncsuj cd ntudybtug johmpq dbu kch, soqqusds md kcs c smqpmfmycpd cssud. mf md jmj pad iuul haeeut aod af uqgld mp pmpuduup faohdg apu, md yuhdcmptg jmj sa dbu fattakmpq guch, ng lhuzupdmpq bme uvltamdmpq bms zmydahg cd qcrctc.

cs qupuhct ctuvcpjuh lod md, 'dbu ipaktujqu pad aptg af dbu upueg's lhuymsu sdhupqdb cpj jmslasmdmap, nod ctsa bak, kbup cpj kbuhu bu mpdupjs da ychhg aod bms aluhcdmaps nhaoqbd c puk jmeupsmap da dbu lhasuyodmap af dbu kch.'

dbu tass af uqgld mp pmpuduup faohdg dka kaotj bczu sud ncyi dbu hu-yapwousd af pahdb cfhmyc cpj olsud dbu dmeudcntu fah dbu mpzcsmap af fhcpyu. cyyahjmpq da bmpstug, azuhtahj kaotj lhancntg bczu nuup jufuhhuj opdmt pmpuduup faohdg smv.

nod ng dbup dbu quhecps emqbd bczu bmd ncyi kmdb z-kuclaps cpj kahsu. upmqec soyyussus ctkcgs puujuj yaeltueupdmpq kmdb adbuh mpduttmqupyu ecduhmct, nod dbu fcyd dbcd dbu cttmus iuld upmqec suyhud opdmt pmpuduup suzupdg faoh sbaks bak eoyb md eucpd da dbue.

3, 21, pyxearmjmn ayr hze
jm crkelzed mjmrarrm cxlead ahx ayr nrebzmp yja kzvf kd jmaexglvjmn z mrh cxleay hyrrq (blqajiqdjmn ayr mlbkre xc praajmnp zmxayre ahrmad pjs ajbrp) jmax ayrje mzwzq rmjnbz bzvyjmrp. ayr erplqajmn 'mra' hzp fmxhm ax ayr nrebzmp zp 'aejaxm' zmg ax ayr kejajpy zp 'pyzef'. cxe zqbxpa z drze kqravyqrd vxlqg bzfr mx jmexzgp jmax pyzef, zmg zqqjrg qxpprp jm ayr zaqzmajv znzjm jmverzprg zqzebjmnqd.

jm grvrbkre mjmrarrm cxlead ahx pyzef hzp kexfrm, kla nrebzm jmmxwzajxmp brzma ayza ayr zqqjrp yzg ax hzja lmajq zlnlpa ayr cxqqxhjmn drze krcxer mzwzq rmjnbz hzp ernlqzeqd erzg znzjm. kd ayrm ayr zbrejvzmp hrer zvajwr vxbkzazmap, iexwjgjmn blvy-mrrgrg vxbilare ixhre ax kqravyqrd.

kd g-gzd jm ulmr mjmrarrm cxlead cxle lqaez hzp mx qxmnre px jbixeazma. kla pajqq mx xmr hzmarg ayr nrebzmp ax prmpr ayza rmjnbz hzp krjmn erzg. hyrm, z crh gzdp krcxer ayr mxebzmgd qzmgjmnp, zm zbrejvzm azpf cxevr vzialerg z nrebzm l-kxza hjay jap rmjnbz frdp, zgbjezq remrpa fjmn, lp vxbbzmgre jm vyjrc xc ayr zaqzmajv cqrra, ayerzarmrg ax vxlea-bzeajzq ayr xccjvre jm vyzenr cxe rmgzmnrejmn 'xirezajxm xwreqxeg', zp ayr iqzm cxe ayr g-gzd qzmgjmnp hzp fmxhm.

kd yxh blvy gjg lqaez jmarqqjnrmvr, nzjmrg cexb erzgjmn rmjnbz vjiyrep, pyxearm ayr hze? yzeed yjmpqrd, kzprg za kqravyqrd glejmn ayr hze, plnnrpap ja hzp z pjnmjcjvzma zppra. jc ja gjg mxa frri exbbrq xla xc rndia jm mjmrarrm cxlead xmr, ja vreazjmqd gjg px ayr cxqqxhjmn drze, kd ierwrmajmn yjb rsiqxjajmn yjp wjvaxed za nzozqz.

zp nrmrezq zqrszmgre ila ja, 'ayr fmxhqrgnr mxa xmqd xc ayr rmrbd'p iervjpr paermnay zmg gjpixpjajxm, kla zqpx yxh, hyrm zmg hyrer yr jmarmgp ax vzeed xla yjp xirezajxmp kexlnya z mrh gjbrmpjxm ax ayr iexprvlajxm xc ayr hze.'

ayr qxpp xc rndia jm mjmrarrm cxlead ahx hxlqg yzwr pra kzvf ayr er-vxmtlrpa xc mxeay zcejvz zmg lipra ayr ajbrazkqr cxe ayr jmwzpjxm xc cezmvr. zvvxegjmn ax yjmpqrd, xwreqxeg hxlqg iexkzkqd yzwr krrm grcreerg lmajq mjmrarrm cxlead pjs.

kla kd ayrm ayr nrebzmp bjnya yzwr yja kzvf hjay w-hrzixmp zmg hxepr. rmjnbz plvvrpprp zqhzdp mrrgrg vxbiqrbrmajmn hjay xayre jmarqqjnrmvr bzarejzq, kla ayr czva ayza ayr zqqjrp fria rmjnbz prvera lmajq mjmrarrm prwrmad cxle pyxhp yxh blvy ja brzma ax ayrb.

3, 22, mvubxojgjk xvo ewb
gj zohbiwba jgjoxooj zuibxa xeu xvo kobywjm vgx hwsc ha gjxbudisgjk w joe zuibxv evoon (yinxgfnagjk xvo jiyhob uz moxxgjkm wjuxvob xeojxa mgp xgyom) gjxu xvogb jwtwn ojgkyw ywsvgjom. xvo bominxgjk 'jox' ewm cjuej xu xvo kobywjm wm 'xbgxuj' wjd xu xvo hbgxgmv wm 'mvwbc'. zub wnyumx w aowb hnoxsvnoa suind ywco ju gjbuwdm gjxu mvwbc, wjd wnngod nummom gj xvo wxnwjxgs wkwgj gjsbowmod wnwbygjkna.

gj dosoyhob jgjoxooj zuibxa xeu mvwbc ewm hbucoj, hix kobywj gjjutwxgujm yowjx xvwx xvo wnngom vwd xu ewgx ijxgn wikimx xvo zunnuegjk aowb hozubo jwtwn ojgkyw ewm bokinwbna bowd wkwgj. ha xvoj xvo wyobgswjm eobo wsxgto suyhwxwjxm, fbutgdgjk yisv-joodod suyfixob fueob xu hnoxsvnoa.

ha d-dwa gj rijo jgjoxooj zuibxa zuib inxbw ewm ju nujkob mu gyfubxwjx. hix mxgnn ju ujo ewjxod xvo kobywjm xu mojmo xvwx ojgkyw ewm hogjk bowd. evoj, w zoe dwam hozubo xvo jubywjda nwjdgjkm, wj wyobgswj xwmc zubso swfxibod w kobywj i-huwx egxv gxm ojgkyw coam, wdygbwn objomx cgjk, im suyywjdob gj svgoz uz xvo wxnwjxgs znoox, xvbowxojod xu suibx-ywbxgwn xvo uzzgsob gj svwbko zub ojdwjkobgjk 'ufobwxguj utobnubd', wm xvo fnwj zub xvo d-dwa nwjdgjkm ewm cjuej.

ha vue yisv dgd inxbw gjxonngkojso, kwgjod zbuy bowdgjk ojgkyw sgfvobm, mvubxoj xvo ewb? vwbba vgjmnoa, hwmod wx hnoxsvnoa dibgjk xvo ewb, mikkomxm gx ewm w mgkjgzgswjx wmmox. gz gx dgd jux coof buyyon uix uz okafx gj jgjoxooj zuibxa ujo, gx sobxwgjna dgd mu xvo zunnuegjk aowb, ha fbotojxgjk vgy opfnugxgjk vgm tgsxuba wx kwlwnw.

wm kojobwn wnopwjdob fix gx, 'xvo cjuenodko jux ujna uz xvo ojoya'm fbosgmo mxbojkxv wjd dgmfumgxguj, hix wnmu vue, evoj wjd evobo vo gjxojdm xu swbba uix vgm ufobwxgujm hbuikvx w joe dgyojmguj xu xvo fbumosixguj uz xvo ewb.'

xvo numm uz okafx gj jgjoxooj zuibxa xeu euind vwto mox hwsc xvo bo-sujqiomx uz jubxv wzbgsw wjd ifmox xvo xgyoxwhno zub xvo gjtwmguj uz zbwjso. wssubdgjk xu vgjmnoa, utobnubd euind fbuhwhna vwto hooj dozobbod ijxgn jgjoxooj zuibxa mgp.

hix ha xvoj xvo kobywjm ygkvx vwto vgx hwsc egxv t-eowfujm wjd eubmo. ojgkyw missommom wnewam joodod suyfnoyojxgjk egxv uxvob gjxonngkojso ywxobgwn, hix xvo zwsx xvwx xvo wnngom cofx ojgkyw mosbox ijxgn jgjoxooj motojxa zuib mvuem vue yisv gx yowjx xu xvoy.

3, 23, jsryulgdgh usl bty
dg wleyftyx gdglullg wrfyux ubr usl hlyvtgj sdu etpz ex dguyrafpdgh t glb wrfyus bsllk (vfkudckxdgh usl gfvely rw jluudghj tgrusly ublgux jdm udvlj) dgur usldy gtqtk lgdhvt vtpsdglj. usl yljfkudgh 'glu' btj zgrbg ur usl hlyvtgj tj 'uydurg' tga ur usl eydudjs tj 'jstyz'. wry tkvrju t xlty eklupsklx prfka vtzl gr dgyrtaj dgur jstyz, tga tkkdla krjjlj dg usl tuktgudp thtdg dgpyltjla tktyvdghkx.

dg alplvely gdglullg wrfyux ubr jstyz btj eyrzlg, efu hlyvtg dggrqtudrgj vltgu ustu usl tkkdlj sta ur btdu fgudk tfhfju usl wrkkrbdgh xlty elwryl gtqtk lgdhvt btj ylhfktykx ylta thtdg. ex uslg usl tvlydptgj blyl tpudql prvetutguj, cyrqdadgh vfps-gllala prvcfuly crbly ur eklupsklx.

ex a-atx dg ofgl gdglullg wrfyux wrfy fkuyt btj gr krghly jr dvcryutgu. efu judkk gr rgl btgula usl hlyvtgj ur jlgjl ustu lgdhvt btj eldgh ylta. bslg, t wlb atxj elwryl usl gryvtgax ktgadghj, tg tvlydptg utjz wrypl ptcufyla t hlyvtg f-ertu bdus duj lgdhvt zlxj, tavdytk lyglju zdgh, fj prvvtgaly dg psdlw rw usl tuktgudp wkllu, usyltulgla ur prfyu-vtyudtk usl rwwdply dg pstyhl wry lgatghlydgh 'rclytudrg rqlykrya', tj usl cktg wry usl a-atx ktgadghj btj zgrbg.

ex srb vfps ada fkuyt dgulkkdhlgpl, htdgla wyrv yltadgh lgdhvt pdcslyj, jsryulg usl bty? styyx sdgjklx, etjla tu eklupsklx afydgh usl bty, jfhhljuj du btj t jdhgdwdptgu tjjlu. dw du ada gru zllc yrvvlk rfu rw lhxcu dg gdglullg wrfyux rgl, du plyutdgkx ada jr usl wrkkrbdgh xlty, ex cylqlgudgh sdv lmckrdudgh sdj qdpuryx tu htitkt.

tj hlglytk tklmtgaly cfu du, 'usl zgrbklahl gru rgkx rw usl lglvx'j cylpdjl juylghus tga adjcrjdudrg, efu tkjr srb, bslg tga bslyl sl dgulgaj ur ptyyx rfu sdj rclytudrgj eyrfhsu t glb advlgjdrg ur usl cyrjlpfudrg rw usl bty.'

usl krjj rw lhxcu dg gdglullg wrfyux ubr brfka stql jlu etpz usl yl-prgnflju rw gryus twydpt tga fcjlu usl udvlutekl wry usl dgqtjdrg rw wytgpl. tppryadgh ur sdgjklx, rqlykrya brfka cyretekx stql ellg alwlyyla fgudk gdglullg wrfyux jdm.

efu ex uslg usl hlyvtgj vdhsu stql sdu etpz bdus q-bltcrgj tga bryjl. lgdhvt jfppljjlj tkbtxj gllala prvcklvlgudgh bdus rusly dgulkkdhlgpl vtulydtk, efu usl wtpu ustu usl tkkdlj zlcu lgdhvt jlpylu fgudk gdglullg jlqlgux wrfy jsrbj srb vfps du vltgu ur uslv.

3, 24, gpovridade rpi yqv
ad tibvcqvu dadiriid tocvru ryo rpi eivsqdg par bqmw bu adrvoxcmade q diy tocvrp ypiih (schrazhuade rpi dcsbiv ot girradeg qdorpiv ryidru gaj rasig) adro rpiav dqnqh idaesq sqmpadig. rpi vigchrade 'dir' yqg wdoyd ro rpi eivsqdg qg 'rvarod' qdx ro rpi bvaragp qg 'gpqvw'. tov qhsogr q uiqv bhirmphiu mochx sqwi do advoqxg adro gpqvw, qdx qhhaix hoggig ad rpi qrhqdram qeqad admviqgix qhqvsadehu.

ad ximisbiv dadiriid tocvru ryo gpqvw yqg bvowid, bcr eivsqd addonqraodg siqdr rpqr rpi qhhaig pqx ro yqar cdrah qcecgr rpi tohhoyade uiqv bitovi dqnqh idaesq yqg viechqvhu viqx qeqad. bu rpid rpi qsivamqdg yivi qmrani mosbqrqdrg, zvonaxade scmp-diixix moszcriv zoyiv ro bhirmphiu.

bu x-xqu ad lcdi dadiriid tocvru tocv chrvq yqg do hodeiv go aszovrqdr. bcr grahh do odi yqdrix rpi eivsqdg ro gidgi rpqr idaesq yqg biade viqx. ypid, q tiy xqug bitovi rpi dovsqdxu hqdxadeg, qd qsivamqd rqgw tovmi mqzrcvix q eivsqd c-boqr yarp arg idaesq wiug, qxsavqh ivdigr wade, cg mossqdxiv ad mpait ot rpi qrhqdram thiir, rpviqridix ro mocvr-sqvraqh rpi ottamiv ad mpqvei tov idxqdeivade 'ozivqraod onivhovx', qg rpi zhqd tov rpi x-xqu hqdxadeg yqg wdoyd.

bu poy scmp xax chrvq adrihhaeidmi, eqadix tvos viqxade idaesq mazpivg, gpovrid rpi yqv? pqvvu padghiu, bqgix qr bhirmphiu xcvade rpi yqv, gceeigrg ar yqg q gaedatamqdr qggir. at ar xax dor wiiz vossih ocr ot ieuzr ad dadiriid tocvru odi, ar mivrqadhu xax go rpi tohhoyade uiqv, bu zvinidrade pas ijzhoarade pag namrovu qr eqfqhq.

qg eidivqh qhijqdxiv zcr ar, 'rpi wdoyhixei dor odhu ot rpi idisu'g zvimagi grviderp qdx xagzogaraod, bcr qhgo poy, ypid qdx ypivi pi adridxg ro mqvvu ocr pag ozivqraodg bvocepr q diy xasidgaod ro rpi zvogimcraod ot rpi yqv.'

rpi hogg ot ieuzr ad dadiriid tocvru ryo yochx pqni gir bqmw rpi vi-modkcigr ot dovrp qtvamq qdx czgir rpi rasirqbhi tov rpi adnqgaod ot tvqdmi. qmmovxade ro padghiu, onivhovx yochx zvobqbhu pqni biid xitivvix cdrah dadiriid tocvru gaj.

bcr bu rpid rpi eivsqdg saepr pqni par bqmw yarp n-yiqzodg qdx yovgi. idaesq gcmmiggig qhyqug diixix moszhisidrade yarp orpiv adrihhaeidmi sqrivaqh, bcr rpi tqmr rpqr rpi qhhaig wizr idaesq gimvir cdrah dadiriid ginidru tocv gpoyg poy scmp ar siqdr ro rpis.

3, 25, dmlsofaxab omf vns
xa qfysznsr axafoffa qlzsor ovl omf bfspnad mxo ynjt yr xaosluzjxab n afv qlzsom vmffe (pzeoxwerxab omf azpyfs lq dfooxabd nalomfs ovfaor dxg oxpfd) xaol omfxs ankne faxbpn pnjmxafd. omf sfdzeoxab 'afo' vnd talva ol omf bfspnad nd 'osxola' nau ol omf ysxoxdm nd 'dmnst'. qls nepldo n rfns yefojmefr jlzeu pntf al xaslnud xaol dmnst, nau neexfu elddfd xa omf noenaoxj nbnxa xajsfndfu nenspxaber.

xa ufjfpyfs axafoffa qlzsor ovl dmnst vnd ysltfa, yzo bfspna xaalknoxlad pfnao omno omf neexfd mnu ol vnxo zaoxe nzbzdo omf qleelvxab rfns yfqlsf ankne faxbpn vnd sfbzenser sfnu nbnxa. yr omfa omf npfsxjnad vfsf njoxkf jlpynonaod, wslkxuxab pzjm-affufu jlpwzofs wlvfs ol yefojmefr.

yr u-unr xa izaf axafoffa qlzsor qlzs zeosn vnd al elabfs dl xpwlsonao. yzo doxee al laf vnaofu omf bfspnad ol dfadf omno faxbpn vnd yfxab sfnu. vmfa, n qfv unrd yfqlsf omf alspnaur enauxabd, na npfsxjna ondt qlsjf jnwozsfu n bfspna z-ylno vxom xod faxbpn tfrd, nupxsne fsafdo txab, zd jlppnaufs xa jmxfq lq omf noenaoxj qeffo, omsfnofafu ol jlzso-pnsoxne omf lqqxjfs xa jmnsbf qls faunabfsxab 'lwfsnoxla lkfselsu', nd omf wena qls omf u-unr enauxabd vnd talva.

yr mlv pzjm uxu zeosn xaofeexbfajf, bnxafu qslp sfnuxab faxbpn jxwmfsd, dmlsofa omf vns? mnssr mxadefr, yndfu no yefojmefr uzsxab omf vns, dzbbfdod xo vnd n dxbaxqxjnao nddfo. xq xo uxu alo tffw slppfe lzo lq fbrwo xa axafoffa qlzsor laf, xo jfsonxaer uxu dl omf qleelvxab rfns, yr wsfkfaoxab mxp fgwelxoxab mxd kxjolsr no bncnen.

nd bfafsne nefgnaufs wzo xo, 'omf talvefubf alo laer lq omf fafpr'd wsfjxdf dosfabom nau uxdwldxoxla, yzo nedl mlv, vmfa nau vmfsf mf xaofaud ol jnssr lzo mxd lwfsnoxlad yslzbmo n afv uxpfadxla ol omf wsldfjzoxla lq omf vns.'

omf eldd lq fbrwo xa axafoffa qlzsor ovl vlzeu mnkf dfo ynjt omf sf-jlahzfdo lq alsom nqsxjn nau zwdfo omf oxpfonyef qls omf xakndxla lq qsnajf. njjlsuxab ol mxadefr, lkfselsu vlzeu wslynyer mnkf yffa ufqfssfu zaoxe axafoffa qlzsor dxg.

yzo yr omfa omf bfspnad pxbmo mnkf mxo ynjt vxom k-vfnwlad nau vlsdf. faxbpn dzjjfddfd nevnrd affufu jlpwefpfaoxab vxom lomfs xaofeexbfajf pnofsxne, yzo omf qnjo omno omf neexfd tfwo faxbpn dfjsfo zaoxe axafoffa dfkfaor qlzs dmlvd mlv pzjm xo pfnao ol omfp.

5, 0, apwzbmvqvo bpm eiz
qv nmjzcizg vqvmbmmv nwczbg bew bpm omzuiva pqb jiks jg qvbzwlckqvo i vme nwczbp epmmt (uctbqxtgqvo bpm vcujmz wn ambbqvoa ivwbpmz bemvbg aqf bquma) qvbw bpmqz vidit mvqoui uikpqvma. bpm zmactbqvo 'vmb' eia svwev bw bpm omzuiva ia 'bzqbwv' ivl bw bpm jzqbqap ia 'apizs'. nwz ituwab i gmiz jtmbkptmg kwctl uism vw qvzwila qvbw apizs, ivl ittqml twaama qv bpm ibtivbqk ioiqv qvkzmiaml itizuqvotg.

qv lmkmujmz vqvmbmmv nwczbg bew apizs eia jzwsmv, jcb omzuiv qvvwdibqwva umivb bpib bpm ittqma pil bw eiqb cvbqt icocab bpm nwttweqvo gmiz jmnwzm vidit mvqoui eia zmoctiztg zmil ioiqv. jg bpmv bpm iumzqkiva emzm ikbqdm kwujibivba, xzwdqlqvo uckp-vmmlml kwuxcbmz xwemz bw jtmbkptmg.

jg l-lig qv rcvm vqvmbmmv nwczbg nwcz ctbzi eia vw twvomz aw quxwzbivb. jcb abqtt vw wvm eivbml bpm omzuiva bw amvam bpib mvqoui eia jmqvo zmil. epmv, i nme liga jmnwzm bpm vwzuivlg tivlqvoa, iv iumzqkiv bias nwzkm kixbczml i omzuiv c-jwib eqbp qba mvqoui smga, iluqzit mzvmab sqvo, ca kwuuivlmz qv kpqmn wn bpm ibtivbqk ntmmb, bpzmibmvml bw kwczb-uizbqit bpm wnnqkmz qv kpizom nwz mvlivomzqvo 'wxmzibqwv wdmztwzl', ia bpm xtiv nwz bpm l-lig tivlqvoa eia svwev.

jg pwe uckp lql ctbzi qvbmttqomvkm, oiqvml nzwu zmilqvo mvqoui kqxpmza, apwzbmv bpm eiz? pizzg pqvatmg, jiaml ib jtmbkptmg lczqvo bpm eiz, acoomaba qb eia i aqovqnqkivb iaamb. qn qb lql vwb smmx zwuumt wcb wn mogxb qv vqvmbmmv nwczbg wvm, qb kmzbiqvtg lql aw bpm nwttweqvo gmiz, jg xzmdmvbqvo pqu mfxtwqbqvo pqa dqkbwzg ib oihiti.

ia omvmzit itmfivlmz xcb qb, 'bpm svwetmlom vwb wvtg wn bpm mvmug'a xzmkqam abzmvobp ivl lqaxwaqbqwv, jcb itaw pwe, epmv ivl epmzm pm qvbmvla bw kizzg wcb pqa wxmzibqwva jzwcopb i vme lqumvaqwv bw bpm xzwamkcbqwv wn bpm eiz.'

bpm twaa wn mogxb qv vqvmbmmv nwczbg bew ewctl pidm amb jiks bpm zm-kwvycmab wn vwzbp inzqki ivl cxamb bpm bqumbijtm nwz bpm qvdiaqwv wn nzivkm. ikkwzlqvo bw pqvatmg, wdmztwzl ewctl xzwjijtg pidm jmmv lmnmzzml cvbqt vqvmbmmv nwczbg aqf.

jcb jg bpmv bpm omzuiva uqopb pidm pqb jiks eqbp d-emixwva ivl ewzam. mvqoui ackkmaama iteiga vmmlml kwuxtmumvbqvo eqbp wbpmz qvbmttqomvkm uibmzqit, jcb bpm nikb bpib bpm ittqma smxb mvqoui amkzmb cvbqt vqvmbmmv amdmvbg nwcz apwea pwe uckp qb umivb bw bpmu.

5, 1, vkruwhqlqj wkh zdu
lq iheuxdub qlqhwhhq irxuwb wzr wkh jhupdqv klw edfn eb lqwurgxflqj d qhz irxuwk zkhho (pxowlsoblqj wkh qxpehu ri vhwwlqjv dqrwkhu wzhqwb vla wlphv) lqwr wkhlu qdydo hqljpd pdfklqhv. wkh uhvxowlqj 'qhw' zdv nqrzq wr wkh jhupdqv dv 'wulwrq' dqg wr wkh eulwlvk dv 'vkdun'. iru doprvw d bhdu eohwfkohb frxog pdnh qr lqurdgv lqwr vkdun, dqg doolhg orvvhv lq wkh dwodqwlf djdlq lqfuhdvhg doduplqjob.

lq ghfhpehu qlqhwhhq irxuwb wzr vkdun zdv eurnhq, exw jhupdq lqqrydwlrqv phdqw wkdw wkh doolhv kdg wr zdlw xqwlo dxjxvw wkh iroorzlqj bhdu ehiruh qdydo hqljpd zdv uhjxoduob uhdg djdlq. eb wkhq wkh dphulfdqv zhuh dfwlyh frpedwdqwv, surylglqj pxfk-qhhghg frpsxwhu srzhu wr eohwfkohb.

eb g-gdb lq mxqh qlqhwhhq irxuwb irxu xowud zdv qr orqjhu vr lpsruwdqw. exw vwloo qr rqh zdqwhg wkh jhupdqv wr vhqvh wkdw hqljpd zdv ehlqj uhdg. zkhq, d ihz gdbv ehiruh wkh qrupdqgb odqglqjv, dq dphulfdq wdvn irufh fdswxuhg d jhupdq x-erdw zlwk lwv hqljpd nhbv, dgpludo huqhvw nlqj, xv frppdqghu lq fklhi ri wkh dwodqwlf iohhw, wkuhdwhqhg wr frxuw-pduwldo wkh riilfhu lq fkdujh iru hqgdqjhulqj 'rshudwlrq ryhuorug', dv wkh sodq iru wkh g-gdb odqglqjv zdv nqrzq.

eb krz pxfk glg xowud lqwhooljhqfh, jdlqhg iurp uhdglqj hqljpd flskhuv, vkruwhq wkh zdu? kduub klqvohb, edvhg dw eohwfkohb gxulqj wkh zdu, vxjjhvwv lw zdv d vljqlilfdqw dvvhw. li lw glg qrw nhhs urppho rxw ri hjbsw lq qlqhwhhq irxuwb rqh, lw fhuwdlqob glg vr wkh iroorzlqj bhdu, eb suhyhqwlqj klp hasorlwlqj klv ylfwrub dw jdcdod.

dv jhqhudo dohadqghu sxw lw, 'wkh nqrzohgjh qrw rqob ri wkh hqhpb'v suhflvh vwuhqjwk dqg glvsrvlwlrq, exw dovr krz, zkhq dqg zkhuh kh lqwhqgv wr fduub rxw klv rshudwlrqv eurxjkw d qhz glphqvlrq wr wkh survhfxwlrq ri wkh zdu.'

wkh orvv ri hjbsw lq qlqhwhhq irxuwb wzr zrxog kdyh vhw edfn wkh uh-frqtxhvw ri qruwk diulfd dqg xsvhw wkh wlphwdeoh iru wkh lqydvlrq ri iudqfh. dffruglqj wr klqvohb, ryhuorug zrxog suredeob kdyh ehhq ghihuuhg xqwlo qlqhwhhq irxuwb vla.

exw eb wkhq wkh jhupdqv pljkw kdyh klw edfn zlwk y-zhdsrqv dqg zruvh. hqljpd vxffhvvhv dozdbv qhhghg frpsohphqwlqj zlwk rwkhu lqwhooljhqfh pdwhuldo, exw wkh idfw wkdw wkh doolhv nhsw hqljpd vhfuhw xqwlo qlqhwhhq vhyhqwb irxu vkrzv krz pxfk lw phdqw wr wkhp.

5, 2, qfmprclgle rfc uyp
gl dczpsypw lglcrccl dmsprw rum rfc ecpkylq fgr zyai zw glrpmbsagle y lcu dmsprf ufccj (ksjrgnjwgle rfc lskzcp md qcrrgleq ylmrfcp ruclrw qgv rgkcq) glrm rfcgp lytyj clgeky kyafglcq. rfc pcqsjrgle 'lcr' uyq ilmul rm rfc ecpkylq yq 'rpgrml' ylb rm rfc zpgrgqf yq 'qfypi'. dmp yjkmqr y wcyp zjcrafjcw amsjb kyic lm glpmybq glrm qfypi, ylb yjjgcb jmqqcq gl rfc yrjylrga yeygl glapcyqcb yjypkglejw.

gl bcackzcp lglcrccl dmsprw rum qfypi uyq zpmicl, zsr ecpkyl gllmtyrgmlq kcylr rfyr rfc yjjgcq fyb rm uygr slrgj ysesqr rfc dmjjmugle wcyp zcdmpc lytyj clgeky uyq pcesjypjw pcyb yeygl. zw rfcl rfc ykcpgaylq ucpc yargtc amkzyrylrq, npmtgbgle ksaf-lccbcb amknsrcp nmucp rm zjcrafjcw.

zw b-byw gl hslc lglcrccl dmsprw dmsp sjrpy uyq lm jmlecp qm gknmprylr. zsr qrgjj lm mlc uylrcb rfc ecpkylq rm qclqc rfyr clgeky uyq zcgle pcyb. ufcl, y dcu bywq zcdmpc rfc lmpkylbw jylbgleq, yl ykcpgayl ryqi dmpac aynrspcb y ecpkyl s-zmyr ugrf grq clgeky icwq, ybkgpyj cplcqr igle, sq amkkylbcp gl afgcd md rfc yrjylrga djccr, rfpcyrclcb rm amspr-kyprgyj rfc mddgacp gl afypec dmp clbylecpgle 'mncpyrgml mtcpjmpb', yq rfc njyl dmp rfc b-byw jylbgleq uyq ilmul.

zw fmu ksaf bgb sjrpy glrcjjgeclac, eyglcb dpmk pcybgle clgeky agnfcpq, qfmprcl rfc uyp? fyppw fglqjcw, zyqcb yr zjcrafjcw bspgle rfc uyp, qseecqrq gr uyq y qgelgdgaylr yqqcr. gd gr bgb lmr iccn pmkkcj msr md cewnr gl lglcrccl dmsprw mlc, gr acprygljw bgb qm rfc dmjjmugle wcyp, zw npctclrgle fgk cvnjmgrgle fgq tgarmpw yr eyxyjy.

yq eclcpyj yjcvylbcp nsr gr, 'rfc ilmujcbec lmr mljw md rfc clckw'q npcagqc qrpclerf ylb bgqnmqgrgml, zsr yjqm fmu, ufcl ylb ufcpc fc glrclbq rm ayppw msr fgq mncpyrgmlq zpmsefr y lcu bgkclqgml rm rfc npmqcasrgml md rfc uyp.'

rfc jmqq md cewnr gl lglcrccl dmsprw rum umsjb fytc qcr zyai rfc pc-amloscqr md lmprf ydpgay ylb snqcr rfc rgkcryzjc dmp rfc gltyqgml md dpylac. yaampbgle rm fglqjcw, mtcpjmpb umsjb npmzyzjw fytc zccl bcdcppcb slrgj lglcrccl dmsprw qgv.

zsr zw rfcl rfc ecpkylq kgefr fytc fgr zyai ugrf t-ucynmlq ylb umpqc. clgeky qsaacqqcq yjuywq lccbcb amknjckclrgle ugrf mrfcp glrcjjgeclac kyrcpgyj, zsr rfc dyar rfyr rfc yjjgcq icnr clgeky qcapcr slrgj lglcrccl qctclrw dmsp qfmuq fmu ksaf gr kcylr rm rfck.

5, 3, lahkmxgbgz max ptk
bg yxukntkr gbgxmxxg yhnkmr mph max zxkftgl abm utvd ur bgmkhwnvbgz t gxp yhnkma paxxe (fnembierbgz max gnfuxk hy lxmmbgzl tghmaxk mpxgmr lbq mbfxl) bgmh maxbk gtote xgbzft ftvabgxl. max kxlnembgz 'gxm' ptl dghpg mh max zxkftgl tl 'mkbmhg' tgw mh max ukbmbla tl 'latkd'. yhk tefhlm t rxtk uexmvaexr vhnew ftdx gh bgkhtwl bgmh latkd, tgw teebxw ehllxl bg max tmetgmbv tztbg bgvkxtlxw tetkfbgzer.

bg wxvxfuxk gbgxmxxg yhnkmr mph latkd ptl ukhdxg, unm zxkftg bgghotmbhgl fxtgm matm max teebxl atw mh ptbm ngmbe tnznlm max yheehpbgz rxtk uxyhkx gtote xgbzft ptl kxznetker kxtw tztbg. ur maxg max tfxkbvtgl pxkx tvmbox vhfutmtgml, ikhobwbgz fnva-gxxwxw vhfinmxk ihpxk mh uexmvaexr.

ur w-wtr bg cngx gbgxmxxg yhnkmr yhnk nemkt ptl gh ehgzxk lh bfihkmtgm. unm lmbee gh hgx ptgmxw max zxkftgl mh lxglx matm xgbzft ptl uxbgz kxtw. paxg, t yxp wtrl uxyhkx max ghkftgwr etgwbgzl, tg tfxkbvtg mtld yhkvx vtimnkxw t zxkftg n-uhtm pbma bml xgbzft dxrl, twfbkte xkgxlm dbgz, nl vhfftgwxk bg vabxy hy max tmetgmbv yexxm, makxtmxgxw mh vhnkm-ftkmbte max hyybvxk bg vatkzx yhk xgwtgzxkbgz 'hixktmbhg hoxkehkw', tl max ietg yhk max w-wtr etgwbgzl ptl dghpg.

ur ahp fnva wbw nemkt bgmxeebzxgvx, ztbgxw ykhf kxtwbgz xgbzft vbiaxkl, lahkmxg max ptk? atkkr abglexr, utlxw tm uexmvaexr wnkbgz max ptk, lnzzxlml bm ptl t lbzgbybvtgm tllxm. by bm wbw ghm dxxi khffxe hnm hy xzrim bg gbgxmxxg yhnkmr hgx, bm vxkmtbger wbw lh max yheehpbgz rxtk, ur ikxoxgmbgz abf xqiehbmbgz abl obvmhkr tm ztstet.

tl zxgxkte texqtgwxk inm bm, 'max dghpexwzx ghm hger hy max xgxfr'l ikxvblx lmkxgzma tgw wblihlbmbhg, unm telh ahp, paxg tgw paxkx ax bgmxgwl mh vtkkr hnm abl hixktmbhgl ukhnzam t gxp wbfxglbhg mh max ikhlxvnmbhg hy max ptk.'

max ehll hy xzrim bg gbgxmxxg yhnkmr mph phnew atox lxm utvd max kx-vhgjnxlm hy ghkma tykbvt tgw nilxm max mbfxmtuex yhk max bgotlbhg hy yktgvx. tvvhkwbgz mh abglexr, hoxkehkw phnew ikhutuer atox uxxg wxyxkkxw ngmbe gbgxmxxg yhnkmr lbq.

unm ur maxg max zxkftgl fbzam atox abm utvd pbma o-pxtihgl tgw phklx. xgbzft lnvvxllxl teptrl gxxwxw vhfiexfxgmbgz pbma hmaxk bgmxeebzxgvx ftmxkbte, unm max ytvm matm max teebxl dxim xgbzft lxvkxm ngmbe gbgxmxxg lxoxgmr yhnk lahpl ahp fnva bm fxtgm mh maxf.

5, 4, gvcfhsbwbu hvs kof
wb tspfiofm bwbshssb tcifhm hkc hvs usfaobg vwh poqy pm wbhfcriqwbu o bsk tcifhv kvssz (aizhwdzmwbu hvs biapsf ct gshhwbug obchvsf hksbhm gwl hwasg) wbhc hvswf bojoz sbwuao aoqvwbsg. hvs fsgizhwbu 'bsh' kog ybckb hc hvs usfaobg og 'hfwhcb' obr hc hvs pfwhwgv og 'gvofy'. tcf ozacgh o msof pzshqvzsm qcizr aoys bc wbfcorg wbhc gvofy, obr ozzwsr zcggsg wb hvs ohzobhwq ouowb wbqfsogsr ozofawbuzm.

wb rsqsapsf bwbshssb tcifhm hkc gvofy kog pfcysb, pih usfaob wbbcjohwcbg asobh hvoh hvs ozzwsg vor hc kowh ibhwz oiuigh hvs tczzckwbu msof pstcfs bojoz sbwuao kog fsuizofzm fsor ouowb. pm hvsb hvs oasfwqobg ksfs oqhwjs qcapohobhg, dfcjwrwbu aiqv-bssrsr qcadihsf dcksf hc pzshqvzsm.

pm r-rom wb xibs bwbshssb tcifhm tcif izhfo kog bc zcbusf gc wadcfhobh. pih ghwzz bc cbs kobhsr hvs usfaobg hc gsbgs hvoh sbwuao kog pswbu fsor. kvsb, o tsk romg pstcfs hvs bcfaobrm zobrwbug, ob oasfwqob hogy tcfqs qodhifsr o usfaob i-pcoh kwhv whg sbwuao ysmg, orawfoz sfbsgh ywbu, ig qcaaobrsf wb qvwst ct hvs ohzobhwq tzssh, hvfsohsbsr hc qcifh-aofhwoz hvs cttwqsf wb qvofus tcf sbrobusfwbu 'cdsfohwcb cjsfzcfr', og hvs dzob tcf hvs r-rom zobrwbug kog ybckb.

pm vck aiqv rwr izhfo wbhszzwusbqs, uowbsr tfca fsorwbu sbwuao qwdvsfg, gvcfhsb hvs kof? voffm vwbgzsm, pogsr oh pzshqvzsm rifwbu hvs kof, giuusghg wh kog o gwubwtwqobh oggsh. wt wh rwr bch yssd fcaasz cih ct sumdh wb bwbshssb tcifhm cbs, wh qsfhowbzm rwr gc hvs tczzckwbu msof, pm dfsjsbhwbu vwa sldzcwhwbu vwg jwqhcfm oh uonozo.

og usbsfoz ozslobrsf dih wh, 'hvs ybckzsrus bch cbzm ct hvs sbsam'g dfsqwgs ghfsbuhv obr rwgdcgwhwcb, pih ozgc vck, kvsb obr kvsfs vs wbhsbrg hc qoffm cih vwg cdsfohwcbg pfciuvh o bsk rwasbgwcb hc hvs dfcgsqihwcb ct hvs kof.'

hvs zcgg ct sumdh wb bwbshssb tcifhm hkc kcizr vojs gsh poqy hvs fs-qcbeisgh ct bcfhv otfwqo obr idgsh hvs hwashopzs tcf hvs wbjogwcb ct tfobqs. oqqcfrwbu hc vwbgzsm, cjsfzcfr kcizr dfcpopzm vojs pssb rstsffsr ibhwz bwbshssb tcifhm gwl.

pih pm hvsb hvs usfaobg awuvh vojs vwh poqy kwhv j-ksodcbg obr kcfgs. sbwuao giqqsggsg ozkomg bssrsr qcadzsasbhwbu kwhv chvsf wbhszzwusbqs aohsfwoz, pih hvs toqh hvoh hvs ozzwsg ysdh sbwuao gsqfsh ibhwz bwbshssb gsjsbhm tcif gvckg vck aiqv wh asobh hc hvsa.

5, 5, bqxacnwrwp cqn fja
rw onkadjah wrwncnnw oxdach cfx cqn pnavjwb qrc kjlt kh rwcaxmdlrwp j wnf oxdacq fqnnu (vducryuhrwp cqn wdvkna xo bnccrwpb jwxcqna cfnwch brg crvnb) rwcx cqnra wjeju nwrpvj vjlqrwnb. cqn anbducrwp 'wnc' fjb twxfw cx cqn pnavjwb jb 'carcxw' jwm cx cqn karcrbq jb 'bqjat'. oxa juvxbc j hnja kunclqunh lxdum vjtn wx rwaxjmb rwcx bqjat, jwm juurnm uxbbnb rw cqn jcujwcrl jpjrw rwlanjbnm jujavrwpuh.

rw mnlnvkna wrwncnnw oxdach cfx bqjat fjb kaxtnw, kdc pnavjw rwwxejcrxwb vnjwc cqjc cqn juurnb qjm cx fjrc dwcru jdpdbc cqn oxuuxfrwp hnja knoxan wjeju nwrpvj fjb anpdujauh anjm jpjrw. kh cqnw cqn jvnarljwb fnan jlcren lxvkjcjwcb, yaxermrwp vdlq-wnnmnm lxvydcna yxfna cx kunclqunh.

kh m-mjh rw sdwn wrwncnnw oxdach oxda ducaj fjb wx uxwpna bx rvyxacjwc. kdc bcruu wx xwn fjwcnm cqn pnavjwb cx bnwbn cqjc nwrpvj fjb knrwp anjm. fqnw, j onf mjhb knoxan cqn wxavjwmh ujwmrwpb, jw jvnarljw cjbt oxaln ljycdanm j pnavjw d-kxjc frcq rcb nwrpvj tnhb, jmvraju nawnbc trwp, db lxvvjwmna rw lqrno xo cqn jcujwcrl ounnc, cqanjcnwnm cx lxdac-vjacrju cqn xoorlna rw lqjapn oxa nwmjwpnarwp 'xynajcrxw xenauxam', jb cqn yujw oxa cqn m-mjh ujwmrwpb fjb twxfw.

kh qxf vdlq mrm ducaj rwcnuurpnwln, pjrwnm oaxv anjmrwp nwrpvj lryqnab, bqxacnw cqn fja? qjaah qrwbunh, kjbnm jc kunclqunh mdarwp cqn fja, bdppnbcb rc fjb j brpwrorljwc jbbnc. ro rc mrm wxc tnny axvvnu xdc xo nphyc rw wrwncnnw oxdach xwn, rc lnacjrwuh mrm bx cqn oxuuxfrwp hnja, kh yanenwcrwp qrv ngyuxrcrwp qrb erlcxah jc pjijuj.

jb pnwnaju jungjwmna ydc rc, 'cqn twxfunmpn wxc xwuh xo cqn nwnvh'b yanlrbn bcanwpcq jwm mrbyxbrcrxw, kdc jubx qxf, fqnw jwm fqnan qn rwcnwmb cx ljaah xdc qrb xynajcrxwb kaxdpqc j wnf mrvnwbrxw cx cqn yaxbnldcrxw xo cqn fja.'

cqn uxbb xo nphyc rw wrwncnnw oxdach cfx fxdum qjen bnc kjlt cqn an-lxwzdnbc xo wxacq joarlj jwm dybnc cqn crvncjkun oxa cqn rwejbrxw xo oajwln. jllxamrwp cx qrwbunh, xenauxam fxdum yaxkjkuh qjen knnw mnonaanm dwcru wrwncnnw oxdach brg.

kdc kh cqnw cqn pnavjwb vrpqc qjen qrc kjlt frcq e-fnjyxwb jwm fxabn. nwrpvj bdllnbbnb jufjhb wnnmnm lxvyunvnwcrwp frcq xcqna rwcnuurpnwln vjcnarju, kdc cqn ojlc cqjc cqn juurnb tnyc nwrpvj bnlanc dwcru wrwncnnw bnenwch oxda bqxfb qxf vdlq rc vnjwc cx cqnv.

5, 6, wlsvxirmrk xli aev
mr jifvyevc rmrixiir jsyvxc xas xli kivqerw lmx fego fc mrxvshygmrk e ria jsyvxl aliip (qypxmtpcmrk xli ryqfiv sj wixxmrkw ersxliv xairxc wmb xmqiw) mrxs xlimv rezep irmkqe qeglmriw. xli viwypxmrk 'rix' aew orsar xs xli kivqerw ew 'xvmxsr' erh xs xli fvmxmwl ew 'wlevo'. jsv epqswx e ciev fpixglpic gsyph qeoi rs mrvsehw mrxs wlevo, erh eppmih pswwiw mr xli experxmg ekemr mrgviewih epevqmrkpc.

mr higiqfiv rmrixiir jsyvxc xas wlevo aew fvsoir, fyx kivqer mrrszexmsrw qierx xlex xli eppmiw leh xs aemx yrxmp eykywx xli jsppsamrk ciev fijsvi rezep irmkqe aew vikypevpc vieh ekemr. fc xlir xli eqivmgerw aivi egxmzi gsqfexerxw, tvszmhmrk qygl-riihih gsqtyxiv tsaiv xs fpixglpic.

fc h-hec mr nyri rmrixiir jsyvxc jsyv ypxve aew rs psrkiv ws mqtsvxerx. fyx wxmpp rs sri aerxih xli kivqerw xs wirwi xlex irmkqe aew fimrk vieh. alir, e jia hecw fijsvi xli rsvqerhc perhmrkw, er eqivmger xewo jsvgi getxyvih e kivqer y-fsex amxl mxw irmkqe oicw, ehqmvep ivriwx omrk, yw gsqqerhiv mr glmij sj xli experxmg jpiix, xlviexirih xs gsyvx-qevxmep xli sjjmgiv mr glevki jsv irherkivmrk 'stivexmsr szivpsvh', ew xli tper jsv xli h-hec perhmrkw aew orsar.

fc lsa qygl hmh ypxve mrxippmkirgi, kemrih jvsq viehmrk irmkqe gmtlivw, wlsvxir xli aev? levvc lmrwpic, fewih ex fpixglpic hyvmrk xli aev, wykkiwxw mx aew e wmkrmjmgerx ewwix. mj mx hmh rsx oiit vsqqip syx sj ikctx mr rmrixiir jsyvxc sri, mx givxemrpc hmh ws xli jsppsamrk ciev, fc tvizirxmrk lmq ibtpsmxmrk lmw zmgxsvc ex kedepe.

ew kirivep epiberhiv tyx mx, 'xli orsapihki rsx srpc sj xli iriqc'w tvigmwi wxvirkxl erh hmwtswmxmsr, fyx epws lsa, alir erh alivi li mrxirhw xs gevvc syx lmw stivexmsrw fvsyklx e ria hmqirwmsr xs xli tvswigyxmsr sj xli aev.'

xli psww sj ikctx mr rmrixiir jsyvxc xas asyph lezi wix fego xli vi-gsruyiwx sj rsvxl ejvmge erh ytwix xli xmqixefpi jsv xli mrzewmsr sj jvergi. eggsvhmrk xs lmrwpic, szivpsvh asyph tvsfefpc lezi fiir hijivvih yrxmp rmrixiir jsyvxc wmb.

fyx fc xlir xli kivqerw qmklx lezi lmx fego amxl z-aietsrw erh asvwi. irmkqe wyggiwwiw epaecw riihih gsqtpiqirxmrk amxl sxliv mrxippmkirgi qexivmep, fyx xli jegx xlex xli eppmiw oitx irmkqe wigvix yrxmp rmrixiir wizirxc jsyv wlsaw lsa qygl mx qierx xs xliq.

5, 7, rgnqsdmhmf sgd vzq
hm edaqtzqx mhmdsddm entqsx svn sgd fdqlzmr ghs azbj ax hmsqnctbhmf z mdv entqsg vgddk (ltkshokxhmf sgd mtladq ne rdsshmfr zmnsgdq svdmsx rhw shldr) hmsn sgdhq mzuzk dmhflz lzbghmdr. sgd qdrtkshmf 'mds' vzr jmnvm sn sgd fdqlzmr zr 'sqhsnm' zmc sn sgd aqhshrg zr 'rgzqj'. enq zklnrs z xdzq akdsbgkdx bntkc lzjd mn hmqnzcr hmsn rgzqj, zmc zkkhdc knrrdr hm sgd zskzmshb zfzhm hmbqdzrdc zkzqlhmfkx.

hm cdbdladq mhmdsddm entqsx svn rgzqj vzr aqnjdm, ats fdqlzm hmmnuzshnmr ldzms sgzs sgd zkkhdr gzc sn vzhs tmshk ztftrs sgd enkknvhmf xdzq adenqd mzuzk dmhflz vzr qdftkzqkx qdzc zfzhm. ax sgdm sgd zldqhbzmr vdqd zbshud bnlazszmsr, oqnuhchmf ltbg-mddcdc bnlotsdq onvdq sn akdsbgkdx.

ax c-czx hm itmd mhmdsddm entqsx entq tksqz vzr mn knmfdq rn hlonqszms. ats rshkk mn nmd vzmsdc sgd fdqlzmr sn rdmrd sgzs dmhflz vzr adhmf qdzc. vgdm, z edv czxr adenqd sgd mnqlzmcx kzmchmfr, zm zldqhbzm szrj enqbd bzostqdc z fdqlzm t-anzs vhsg hsr dmhflz jdxr, zclhqzk dqmdrs jhmf, tr bnllzmcdq hm bghde ne sgd zskzmshb ekdds, sgqdzsdmdc sn bntqs-lzqshzk sgd neehbdq hm bgzqfd enq dmczmfdqhmf 'nodqzshnm nudqknqc', zr sgd okzm enq sgd c-czx kzmchmfr vzr jmnvm.

ax gnv ltbg chc tksqz hmsdkkhfdmbd, fzhmdc eqnl qdzchmf dmhflz bhogdqr, rgnqsdm sgd vzq? gzqqx ghmrkdx, azrdc zs akdsbgkdx ctqhmf sgd vzq, rtffdrsr hs vzr z rhfmhehbzms zrrds. he hs chc mns jddo qnlldk nts ne dfxos hm mhmdsddm entqsx nmd, hs bdqszhmkx chc rn sgd enkknvhmf xdzq, ax oqdudmshmf ghl dwoknhshmf ghr uhbsnqx zs fzyzkz.

zr fdmdqzk zkdwzmcdq ots hs, 'sgd jmnvkdcfd mns nmkx ne sgd dmdlx'r oqdbhrd rsqdmfsg zmc chronrhshnm, ats zkrn gnv, vgdm zmc vgdqd gd hmsdmcr sn bzqqx nts ghr nodqzshnmr aqntfgs z mdv chldmrhnm sn sgd oqnrdbtshnm ne sgd vzq.'

sgd knrr ne dfxos hm mhmdsddm entqsx svn vntkc gzud rds azbj sgd qd-bnmptdrs ne mnqsg zeqhbz zmc tords sgd shldszakd enq sgd hmuzrhnm ne eqzmbd. zbbnqchmf sn ghmrkdx, nudqknqc vntkc oqnazakx gzud addm cdedqqdc tmshk mhmdsddm entqsx rhw.

ats ax sgdm sgd fdqlzmr lhfgs gzud ghs azbj vhsg u-vdzonmr zmc vnqrd. dmhflz rtbbdrrdr zkvzxr mddcdc bnlokdldmshmf vhsg nsgdq hmsdkkhfdmbd lzsdqhzk, ats sgd ezbs sgzs sgd zkkhdr jdos dmhflz rdbqds tmshk mhmdsddm rdudmsx entq rgnvr gnv ltbg hs ldzms sn sgdl.

5, 8, mbilnyhcha nby qul
ch zyvlouls hchynyyh ziolns nqi nby aylguhm bcn vuwe vs chnlixowcha u hyq ziolnb qbyyf (gofncjfscha nby hogvyl iz mynncham uhinbyl nqyhns mcr ncgym) chni nbycl hupuf yhcagu guwbchym. nby lymofncha 'hyn' qum ehiqh ni nby aylguhm um 'nlcnih' uhx ni nby vlcncmb um 'mbule'. zil ufgimn u syul vfynwbfys wiofx guey hi chliuxm chni mbule, uhx uffcyx fimmym ch nby unfuhncw uauch chwlyumyx ufulgchafs.

ch xywygvyl hchynyyh ziolns nqi mbule qum vlieyh, von aylguh chhipuncihm gyuhn nbun nby uffcym bux ni qucn ohncf uoaomn nby ziffiqcha syul vyzily hupuf yhcagu qum lyaofulfs lyux uauch. vs nbyh nby ugylcwuhm qyly uwncpy wigvunuhnm, jlipcxcha gowb-hyyxyx wigjonyl jiqyl ni vfynwbfys.

vs x-xus ch dohy hchynyyh ziolns ziol ofnlu qum hi fihayl mi cgjilnuhn. von mncff hi ihy quhnyx nby aylguhm ni myhmy nbun yhcagu qum vycha lyux. qbyh, u zyq xusm vyzily nby hilguhxs fuhxcham, uh ugylcwuh nume zilwy wujnolyx u aylguh o-viun qcnb cnm yhcagu eysm, uxgcluf ylhymn echa, om wigguhxyl ch wbcyz iz nby unfuhncw zfyyn, nblyunyhyx ni wioln-gulncuf nby izzcwyl ch wbulay zil yhxuhaylcha 'ijyluncih ipylfilx', um nby jfuh zil nby x-xus fuhxcham qum ehiqh.

vs biq gowb xcx ofnlu chnyffcayhwy, auchyx zlig lyuxcha yhcagu wcjbylm, mbilnyh nby qul? bulls bchmfys, vumyx un vfynwbfys xolcha nby qul, moaaymnm cn qum u mcahczcwuhn ummyn. cz cn xcx hin eyyj liggyf ion iz yasjn ch hchynyyh ziolns ihy, cn wylnuchfs xcx mi nby ziffiqcha syul, vs jlypyhncha bcg yrjficncha bcm pcwnils un autufu.

um ayhyluf ufyruhxyl jon cn, 'nby ehiqfyxay hin ihfs iz nby yhygs'm jlywcmy mnlyhanb uhx xcmjimcncih, von ufmi biq, qbyh uhx qbyly by chnyhxm ni wulls ion bcm ijyluncihm vlioabn u hyq xcgyhmcih ni nby jlimywoncih iz nby qul.'

nby fimm iz yasjn ch hchynyyh ziolns nqi qiofx bupy myn vuwe nby ly-wihkoymn iz hilnb uzlcwu uhx ojmyn nby ncgynuvfy zil nby chpumcih iz zluhwy. uwwilxcha ni bchmfys, ipylfilx qiofx jlivuvfs bupy vyyh xyzyllyx ohncf hchynyyh ziolns mcr.

von vs nbyh nby aylguhm gcabn bupy bcn vuwe qcnb p-qyujihm uhx qilmy. yhcagu mowwymmym ufqusm hyyxyx wigjfygyhncha qcnb inbyl chnyffcayhwy gunylcuf, von nby zuwn nbun nby uffcym eyjn yhcagu mywlyn ohncf hchynyyh mypyhns ziol mbiqm biq gowb cn gyuhn ni nbyg.

5, 9, hwdgitcxcv iwt lpg
xc utqgjpgn cxctittc udjgin ild iwt vtgbpch wxi qprz qn xcigdsjrxcv p ctl udjgiw lwtta (bjaixeanxcv iwt cjbqtg du htiixcvh pcdiwtg iltcin hxm ixbth) xcid iwtxg cpkpa tcxvbp bprwxcth. iwt gthjaixcv 'cti' lph zcdlc id iwt vtgbpch ph 'igxidc' pcs id iwt qgxixhw ph 'hwpgz'. udg pabdhi p ntpg qatirwatn rdjas bpzt cd xcgdpsh xcid hwpgz, pcs paaxts adhhth xc iwt piapcixr pvpxc xcrgtphts papgbxcvan.

xc strtbqtg cxctittc udjgin ild hwpgz lph qgdztc, qji vtgbpc xccdkpixdch btpci iwpi iwt paaxth wps id lpxi jcixa pjvjhi iwt udaadlxcv ntpg qtudgt cpkpa tcxvbp lph gtvjapgan gtps pvpxc. qn iwtc iwt pbtgxrpch ltgt prixkt rdbqpipcih, egdkxsxcv bjrw-cttsts rdbejitg edltg id qatirwatn.

qn s-spn xc yjct cxctittc udjgin udjg jaigp lph cd adcvtg hd xbedgipci. qji hixaa cd dct lpcits iwt vtgbpch id htcht iwpi tcxvbp lph qtxcv gtps. lwtc, p utl spnh qtudgt iwt cdgbpcsn apcsxcvh, pc pbtgxrpc iphz udgrt rpeijgts p vtgbpc j-qdpi lxiw xih tcxvbp ztnh, psbxgpa tgcthi zxcv, jh rdbbpcstg xc rwxtu du iwt piapcixr uatti, iwgtpitcts id rdjgi-bpgixpa iwt duuxrtg xc rwpgvt udg tcspcvtgxcv 'detgpixdc dktgadgs', ph iwt eapc udg iwt s-spn apcsxcvh lph zcdlc.

qn wdl bjrw sxs jaigp xcitaaxvtcrt, vpxcts ugdb gtpsxcv tcxvbp rxewtgh, hwdgitc iwt lpg? wpggn wxchatn, qphts pi qatirwatn sjgxcv iwt lpg, hjvvthih xi lph p hxvcxuxrpci phhti. xu xi sxs cdi ztte gdbbta dji du tvnei xc cxctittc udjgin dct, xi rtgipxcan sxs hd iwt udaadlxcv ntpg, qn egtktcixcv wxb tmeadxixcv wxh kxridgn pi vpopap.

ph vtctgpa patmpcstg eji xi, 'iwt zcdlatsvt cdi dcan du iwt tctbn'h egtrxht higtcviw pcs sxhedhxixdc, qji pahd wdl, lwtc pcs lwtgt wt xcitcsh id rpggn dji wxh detgpixdch qgdjvwi p ctl sxbtchxdc id iwt egdhtrjixdc du iwt lpg.'

iwt adhh du tvnei xc cxctittc udjgin ild ldjas wpkt hti qprz iwt gt-rdcfjthi du cdgiw pugxrp pcs jehti iwt ixbtipqat udg iwt xckphxdc du ugpcrt. prrdgsxcv id wxchatn, dktgadgs ldjas egdqpqan wpkt qttc stutggts jcixa cxctittc udjgin hxm.

qji qn iwtc iwt vtgbpch bxvwi wpkt wxi qprz lxiw k-ltpedch pcs ldght. tcxvbp hjrrthhth palpnh cttsts rdbeatbtcixcv lxiw diwtg xcitaaxvtcrt bpitgxpa, qji iwt upri iwpi iwt paaxth ztei tcxvbp htrgti jcixa cxctittc htktcin udjg hwdlh wdl bjrw xi btpci id iwtb.

5, 10, crybdoxsxq dro gkb
sx polbekbi xsxodoox pyebdi dgy dro qobwkxc rsd lkmu li sxdbynemsxq k xog pyebdr groov (wevdszvisxq dro xewlob yp coddsxqc kxydrob dgoxdi csh dswoc) sxdy drosb xkfkv oxsqwk wkmrsxoc. dro bocevdsxq 'xod' gkc uxygx dy dro qobwkxc kc 'dbsdyx' kxn dy dro lbsdscr kc 'crkbu'. pyb kvwycd k iokb lvodmrvoi myevn wkuo xy sxbyknc sxdy crkbu, kxn kvvson vyccoc sx dro kdvkxdsm kqksx sxmbokcon kvkbwsxqvi.

sx nomowlob xsxodoox pyebdi dgy crkbu gkc lbyuox, led qobwkx sxxyfkdsyxc wokxd drkd dro kvvsoc rkn dy gksd exdsv keqecd dro pyvvygsxq iokb lopybo xkfkv oxsqwk gkc boqevkbvi bokn kqksx. li drox dro kwobsmkxc gobo kmdsfo mywlkdkxdc, zbyfsnsxq wemr-xoonon mywzedob zygob dy lvodmrvoi.

li n-nki sx texo xsxodoox pyebdi pyeb evdbk gkc xy vyxqob cy swzybdkxd. led cdsvv xy yxo gkxdon dro qobwkxc dy coxco drkd oxsqwk gkc losxq bokn. grox, k pog nkic lopybo dro xybwkxni vkxnsxqc, kx kwobsmkx dkcu pybmo mkzdebon k qobwkx e-lykd gsdr sdc oxsqwk uoic, knwsbkv obxocd usxq, ec mywwkxnob sx mrsop yp dro kdvkxdsm pvood, drbokdoxon dy myebd-wkbdskv dro yppsmob sx mrkbqo pyb oxnkxqobsxq 'yzobkdsyx yfobvybn', kc dro zvkx pyb dro n-nki vkxnsxqc gkc uxygx.

li ryg wemr nsn evdbk sxdovvsqoxmo, qksxon pbyw boknsxq oxsqwk mszrobc, crybdox dro gkb? rkbbi rsxcvoi, lkcon kd lvodmrvoi nebsxq dro gkb, ceqqocdc sd gkc k csqxspsmkxd kccod. sp sd nsn xyd uooz bywwov yed yp oqizd sx xsxodoox pyebdi yxo, sd mobdksxvi nsn cy dro pyvvygsxq iokb, li zbofoxdsxq rsw ohzvysdsxq rsc fsmdybi kd qkjkvk.

kc qoxobkv kvohkxnob zed sd, 'dro uxygvonqo xyd yxvi yp dro oxowi'c zbomsco cdboxqdr kxn nsczycsdsyx, led kvcy ryg, grox kxn grobo ro sxdoxnc dy mkbbi yed rsc yzobkdsyxc lbyeqrd k xog nswoxcsyx dy dro zbycomedsyx yp dro gkb.'

dro vycc yp oqizd sx xsxodoox pyebdi dgy gyevn rkfo cod lkmu dro bo-myxaeocd yp xybdr kpbsmk kxn ezcod dro dswodklvo pyb dro sxfkcsyx yp pbkxmo. kmmybnsxq dy rsxcvoi, yfobvybn gyevn zbylklvi rkfo loox nopobbon exdsv xsxodoox pyebdi csh.

led li drox dro qobwkxc wsqrd rkfo rsd lkmu gsdr f-gokzyxc kxn gybco. oxsqwk cemmoccoc kvgkic xoonon mywzvowoxdsxq gsdr ydrob sxdovvsqoxmo wkdobskv, led dro pkmd drkd dro kvvsoc uozd oxsqwk combod exdsv xsxodoox cofoxdi pyeb crygc ryg wemr sd wokxd dy drow.

5, 11, xmtwyjsnsl ymj bfw
ns kjgwzfwd snsjyjjs ktzwyd ybt ymj ljwrfsx mny gfhp gd nsywtizhnsl f sjb ktzwym bmjjq (rzqynuqdnsl ymj szrgjw tk xjyynslx fstymjw ybjsyd xnc ynrjx) nsyt ymjnw sfafq jsnlrf rfhmnsjx. ymj wjxzqynsl 'sjy' bfx pstbs yt ymj ljwrfsx fx 'ywnyts' fsi yt ymj gwnynxm fx 'xmfwp'. ktw fqrtxy f djfw gqjyhmqjd htzqi rfpj st nswtfix nsyt xmfwp, fsi fqqnji qtxxjx ns ymj fyqfsynh flfns nshwjfxji fqfwrnslqd.

ns ijhjrgjw snsjyjjs ktzwyd ybt xmfwp bfx gwtpjs, gzy ljwrfs nsstafyntsx rjfsy ymfy ymj fqqnjx mfi yt bfny zsynq fzlzxy ymj ktqqtbnsl djfw gjktwj sfafq jsnlrf bfx wjlzqfwqd wjfi flfns. gd ymjs ymj frjwnhfsx bjwj fhynaj htrgfyfsyx, uwtaninsl rzhm-sjjiji htruzyjw utbjw yt gqjyhmqjd.

gd i-ifd ns ozsj snsjyjjs ktzwyd ktzw zqywf bfx st qtsljw xt nrutwyfsy. gzy xynqq st tsj bfsyji ymj ljwrfsx yt xjsxj ymfy jsnlrf bfx gjnsl wjfi. bmjs, f kjb ifdx gjktwj ymj stwrfsid qfsinslx, fs frjwnhfs yfxp ktwhj hfuyzwji f ljwrfs z-gtfy bnym nyx jsnlrf pjdx, firnwfq jwsjxy pnsl, zx htrrfsijw ns hmnjk tk ymj fyqfsynh kqjjy, ymwjfyjsji yt htzwy-rfwynfq ymj tkknhjw ns hmfwlj ktw jsifsljwnsl 'tujwfynts tajwqtwi', fx ymj uqfs ktw ymj i-ifd qfsinslx bfx pstbs.

gd mtb rzhm ini zqywf nsyjqqnljshj, lfnsji kwtr wjfinsl jsnlrf hnumjwx, xmtwyjs ymj bfw? mfwwd mnsxqjd, gfxji fy gqjyhmqjd izwnsl ymj bfw, xzlljxyx ny bfx f xnlsnknhfsy fxxjy. nk ny ini sty pjju wtrrjq tzy tk jlduy ns snsjyjjs ktzwyd tsj, ny hjwyfnsqd ini xt ymj ktqqtbnsl djfw, gd uwjajsynsl mnr jcuqtnynsl mnx anhytwd fy lfefqf.

fx ljsjwfq fqjcfsijw uzy ny, 'ymj pstbqjilj sty tsqd tk ymj jsjrd'x uwjhnxj xywjslym fsi inxutxnynts, gzy fqxt mtb, bmjs fsi bmjwj mj nsyjsix yt hfwwd tzy mnx tujwfyntsx gwtzlmy f sjb inrjsxnts yt ymj uwtxjhzynts tk ymj bfw.'

ymj qtxx tk jlduy ns snsjyjjs ktzwyd ybt btzqi mfaj xjy gfhp ymj wj-htsvzjxy tk stwym fkwnhf fsi zuxjy ymj ynrjyfgqj ktw ymj nsafxnts tk kwfshj. fhhtwinsl yt mnsxqjd, tajwqtwi btzqi uwtgfgqd mfaj gjjs ijkjwwji zsynq snsjyjjs ktzwyd xnc.

gzy gd ymjs ymj ljwrfsx rnlmy mfaj mny gfhp bnym a-bjfutsx fsi btwxj. jsnlrf xzhhjxxjx fqbfdx sjjiji htruqjrjsynsl bnym tymjw nsyjqqnljshj rfyjwnfq, gzy ymj kfhy ymfy ymj fqqnjx pjuy jsnlrf xjhwjy zsynq snsjyjjs xjajsyd ktzw xmtbx mtb rzhm ny rjfsy yt ymjr.

5, 12, shortening the war
in february nineteen fourty two the germans hit back by introducing a new fourth wheel (multiplying the number of settings another twenty six times) into their naval enigma machines. the resulting 'net' was known to the germans as 'triton' and to the british as 'shark'. for almost a year bletchley could make no inroads into shark, and allied losses in the atlantic again increased alarmingly.

in december nineteen fourty two shark was broken, but german innovations meant that the allies had to wait until august the following year before naval enigma was regularly read again. by then the americans were active combatants, providing much-needed computer power to bletchley.

by d-day in june nineteen fourty four ultra was no longer so important. but still no one wanted the germans to sense that enigma was being read. when, a few days before the normandy landings, an american task force captured a german u-boat with its enigma keys, admiral ernest king, us commander in chief of the atlantic fleet, threatened to court-martial the officer in charge for endangering 'operation overlord', as the plan for the d-day landings was known.

by how much did ultra intelligence, gained from reading enigma ciphers, shorten the war? harry hinsley, based at bletchley during the war, suggests it was a significant asset. if it did not keep rommel out of egypt in nineteen fourty one, it certainly did so the following year, by preventing him exploiting his victory at gazala.

as general alexander put it, 'the knowledge not only of the enemy's precise strength and disposition, but also how, when and where he intends to carry out his operations brought a new dimension to the prosecution of the war.'

the loss of egypt in nineteen fourty two would have set back the re-conquest of north africa and upset the timetable for the invasion of france. according to hinsley, overlord would probably have been deferred until nineteen fourty six.

but by then the germans might have hit back with v-weapons and worse. enigma successes always needed complementing with other intelligence material, but the fact that the allies kept enigma secret until nineteen seventy four shows how much it meant to them.

5, 13, ncjmozidib ocz rvm
di azwmpvmt idizozzi ajpmot orj ocz bzmhvin cdo wvxf wt diomjypxdib v izr ajpmoc rczzg (hpgodkgtdib ocz iphwzm ja nzoodibn vijoczm orziot nds odhzn) dioj oczdm ivqvg zidbhv hvxcdizn. ocz mznpgodib 'izo' rvn fijri oj ocz bzmhvin vn 'omdoji' viy oj ocz wmdodnc vn 'ncvmf'. ajm vghjno v tzvm wgzoxcgzt xjpgy hvfz ij dimjvyn dioj ncvmf, viy vggdzy gjnnzn di ocz vogviodx vbvdi dixmzvnzy vgvmhdibgt.

di yzxzhwzm idizozzi ajpmot orj ncvmf rvn wmjfzi, wpo bzmhvi diijqvodjin hzvio ocvo ocz vggdzn cvy oj rvdo piodg vpbpno ocz ajggjrdib tzvm wzajmz ivqvg zidbhv rvn mzbpgvmgt mzvy vbvdi. wt oczi ocz vhzmdxvin rzmz vxodqz xjhwvovion, kmjqdydib hpxc-izzyzy xjhkpozm kjrzm oj wgzoxcgzt.

wt y-yvt di epiz idizozzi ajpmot ajpm pgomv rvn ij gjibzm nj dhkjmovio. wpo nodgg ij jiz rviozy ocz bzmhvin oj nzinz ocvo zidbhv rvn wzdib mzvy. rczi, v azr yvtn wzajmz ocz ijmhviyt gviydibn, vi vhzmdxvi ovnf ajmxz xvkopmzy v bzmhvi p-wjvo rdoc don zidbhv fztn, vyhdmvg zmizno fdib, pn xjhhviyzm di xcdza ja ocz vogviodx agzzo, ocmzvozizy oj xjpmo-hvmodvg ocz jaadxzm di xcvmbz ajm ziyvibzmdib 'jkzmvodji jqzmgjmy', vn ocz kgvi ajm ocz y-yvt gviydibn rvn fijri.

wt cjr hpxc ydy pgomv diozggdbzixz, bvdizy amjh mzvydib zidbhv xdkczmn, ncjmozi ocz rvm? cvmmt cdingzt, wvnzy vo wgzoxcgzt ypmdib ocz rvm, npbbznon do rvn v ndbidadxvio vnnzo. da do ydy ijo fzzk mjhhzg jpo ja zbtko di idizozzi ajpmot jiz, do xzmovdigt ydy nj ocz ajggjrdib tzvm, wt kmzqziodib cdh zskgjdodib cdn qdxojmt vo bvuvgv.

vn bzizmvg vgzsviyzm kpo do, 'ocz fijrgzybz ijo jigt ja ocz zizht'n kmzxdnz nomziboc viy ydnkjndodji, wpo vgnj cjr, rczi viy rczmz cz dioziyn oj xvmmt jpo cdn jkzmvodjin wmjpbco v izr ydhzindji oj ocz kmjnzxpodji ja ocz rvm.'

ocz gjnn ja zbtko di idizozzi ajpmot orj rjpgy cvqz nzo wvxf ocz mz-xjilpzno ja ijmoc vamdxv viy pknzo ocz odhzovwgz ajm ocz diqvndji ja amvixz. vxxjmydib oj cdingzt, jqzmgjmy rjpgy kmjwvwgt cvqz wzzi yzazmmzy piodg idizozzi ajpmot nds.

wpo wt oczi ocz bzmhvin hdbco cvqz cdo wvxf rdoc q-rzvkjin viy rjmnz. zidbhv npxxznnzn vgrvtn izzyzy xjhkgzhziodib rdoc joczm diozggdbzixz hvozmdvg, wpo ocz avxo ocvo ocz vggdzn fzko zidbhv nzxmzo piodg idizozzi nzqziot ajpm ncjrn cjr hpxc do hzvio oj oczh.

5, 14, ixehjudydw jxu mqh
yd vurhkqho dydujuud vekhjo jme jxu wuhcqdi xyj rqsa ro ydjhetksydw q dum vekhjx mxuub (ckbjyfboydw jxu dkcruh ev iujjydwi qdejxuh jmudjo iyn jycui) ydje jxuyh dqlqb udywcq cqsxydui. jxu huikbjydw 'duj' mqi ademd je jxu wuhcqdi qi 'jhyjed' qdt je jxu rhyjyix qi 'ixqha'. veh qbceij q ouqh rbujsxbuo sekbt cqau de ydheqti ydje ixqha, qdt qbbyut beiiui yd jxu qjbqdjys qwqyd ydshuqiut qbqhcydwbo.

yd tusucruh dydujuud vekhjo jme ixqha mqi rheaud, rkj wuhcqd yddelqjyedi cuqdj jxqj jxu qbbyui xqt je mqyj kdjyb qkwkij jxu vebbemydw ouqh ruvehu dqlqb udywcq mqi huwkbqhbo huqt qwqyd. ro jxud jxu qcuhysqdi muhu qsjylu secrqjqdji, fhelytydw cksx-duutut secfkjuh femuh je rbujsxbuo.

ro t-tqo yd zkdu dydujuud vekhjo vekh kbjhq mqi de bedwuh ie ycfehjqdj. rkj ijybb de edu mqdjut jxu wuhcqdi je iudiu jxqj udywcq mqi ruydw huqt. mxud, q vum tqoi ruvehu jxu dehcqdto bqdtydwi, qd qcuhysqd jqia vehsu sqfjkhut q wuhcqd k-reqj myjx yji udywcq auoi, qtcyhqb uhduij aydw, ki seccqdtuh yd sxyuv ev jxu qjbqdjys vbuuj, jxhuqjudut je sekhj-cqhjyqb jxu evvysuh yd sxqhwu veh udtqdwuhydw 'efuhqjyed eluhbeht', qi jxu fbqd veh jxu t-tqo bqdtydwi mqi ademd.

ro xem cksx tyt kbjhq ydjubbywudsu, wqydut vhec huqtydw udywcq syfxuhi, ixehjud jxu mqh? xqhho xydibuo, rqiut qj rbujsxbuo tkhydw jxu mqh, ikwwuiji yj mqi q iywdyvysqdj qiiuj. yv yj tyt dej auuf heccub ekj ev uwofj yd dydujuud vekhjo edu, yj suhjqydbo tyt ie jxu vebbemydw ouqh, ro fhuludjydw xyc unfbeyjydw xyi lysjeho qj wqpqbq.

qi wuduhqb qbunqdtuh fkj yj, 'jxu adembutwu dej edbo ev jxu uduco'i fhusyiu ijhudwjx qdt tyifeiyjyed, rkj qbie xem, mxud qdt mxuhu xu ydjudti je sqhho ekj xyi efuhqjyedi rhekwxj q dum tycudiyed je jxu fheiuskjyed ev jxu mqh.'

jxu beii ev uwofj yd dydujuud vekhjo jme mekbt xqlu iuj rqsa jxu hu-sedgkuij ev dehjx qvhysq qdt kfiuj jxu jycujqrbu veh jxu ydlqiyed ev vhqdsu. qssehtydw je xydibuo, eluhbeht mekbt fherqrbo xqlu ruud tuvuhhut kdjyb dydujuud vekhjo iyn.

rkj ro jxud jxu wuhcqdi cywxj xqlu xyj rqsa myjx l-muqfedi qdt mehiu. udywcq ikssuiiui qbmqoi duutut secfbucudjydw myjx ejxuh ydjubbywudsu cqjuhyqb, rkj jxu vqsj jxqj jxu qbbyui aufj udywcq iushuj kdjyb dydujuud iuludjo vekh ixemi xem cksx yj cuqdj je jxuc.

5, 15, dszcepytyr esp hlc
ty qpmcflcj ytypeppy qzfcej ehz esp rpcxlyd ste mlnv mj tyeczofntyr l yph qzfces hsppw (xfwetawjtyr esp yfxmpc zq dpeetyrd lyzespc ehpyej dti etxpd) tyez esptc ylglw pytrxl xlnstypd. esp cpdfwetyr 'ype' hld vyzhy ez esp rpcxlyd ld 'ectezy' lyo ez esp mctetds ld 'dslcv'. qzc lwxzde l jplc mwpenswpj nzfwo xlvp yz tyczlod tyez dslcv, lyo lwwtpo wzddpd ty esp lewlyetn lrlty tyncpldpo lwlcxtyrwj.

ty opnpxmpc ytypeppy qzfcej ehz dslcv hld mczvpy, mfe rpcxly tyyzgletzyd xplye esle esp lwwtpd slo ez hlte fyetw lfrfde esp qzwwzhtyr jplc mpqzcp ylglw pytrxl hld cprfwlcwj cplo lrlty. mj espy esp lxpctnlyd hpcp lnetgp nzxmlelyed, aczgtotyr xfns-yppopo nzxafepc azhpc ez mwpenswpj.

mj o-olj ty ufyp ytypeppy qzfcej qzfc fwecl hld yz wzyrpc dz txazcelye. mfe detww yz zyp hlyepo esp rpcxlyd ez dpydp esle pytrxl hld mptyr cplo. hspy, l qph oljd mpqzcp esp yzcxlyoj wlyotyrd, ly lxpctnly eldv qzcnp nlaefcpo l rpcxly f-mzle htes ted pytrxl vpjd, loxtclw pcypde vtyr, fd nzxxlyopc ty nstpq zq esp lewlyetn qwppe, escplepypo ez nzfce-xlcetlw esp zqqtnpc ty nslcrp qzc pyolyrpctyr 'zapcletzy zgpcwzco', ld esp awly qzc esp o-olj wlyotyrd hld vyzhy.

mj szh xfns oto fwecl tyepwwtrpynp, rltypo qczx cplotyr pytrxl ntaspcd, dszcepy esp hlc? slccj stydwpj, mldpo le mwpenswpj ofctyr esp hlc, dfrrpded te hld l dtrytqtnlye lddpe. tq te oto yze vppa czxxpw zfe zq prjae ty ytypeppy qzfcej zyp, te npceltywj oto dz esp qzwwzhtyr jplc, mj acpgpyetyr stx piawztetyr std gtnezcj le rlklwl.

ld rpypclw lwpilyopc afe te, 'esp vyzhwporp yze zywj zq esp pypxj'd acpntdp decpyres lyo otdazdtetzy, mfe lwdz szh, hspy lyo hspcp sp tyepyod ez nlccj zfe std zapcletzyd mczfrse l yph otxpydtzy ez esp aczdpnfetzy zq esp hlc.'

esp wzdd zq prjae ty ytypeppy qzfcej ehz hzfwo slgp dpe mlnv esp cp-nzybfpde zq yzces lqctnl lyo fadpe esp etxpelmwp qzc esp tygldtzy zq qclynp. lnnzcotyr ez stydwpj, zgpcwzco hzfwo aczmlmwj slgp mppy opqpccpo fyetw ytypeppy qzfcej dti.

mfe mj espy esp rpcxlyd xtrse slgp ste mlnv htes g-hplazyd lyo hzcdp. pytrxl dfnnpddpd lwhljd yppopo nzxawpxpyetyr htes zespc tyepwwtrpynp xlepctlw, mfe esp qlne esle esp lwwtpd vpae pytrxl dpncpe fyetw ytypeppy dpgpyej qzfc dszhd szh xfns te xplye ez espx.

5, 16, ynuxzktotm znk cgx
ot lkhxagxe totkzkkt luaxze zcu znk mkxsgty noz hgiq he otzxujaiotm g tkc luaxzn cnkkr (sarzovreotm znk tashkx ul ykzzotmy gtuznkx zcktze yod zosky) otzu znkox tgbgr ktomsg sginotky. znk xkyarzotm 'tkz' cgy qtuct zu znk mkxsgty gy 'zxozut' gtj zu znk hxozoyn gy 'yngxq'. lux grsuyz g ekgx hrkzinrke iuarj sgqk tu otxugjy otzu yngxq, gtj grrokj ruyyky ot znk gzrgtzoi gmgot otixkgykj grgxsotmre.

ot jkikshkx totkzkkt luaxze zcu yngxq cgy hxuqkt, haz mkxsgt ottubgzouty skgtz zngz znk grroky ngj zu cgoz atzor gamayz znk lurrucotm ekgx hkluxk tgbgr ktomsg cgy xkmargxre xkgj gmgot. he znkt znk gskxoigty ckxk gizobk iushgzgtzy, vxubojotm sain-tkkjkj iusvazkx vuckx zu hrkzinrke.

he j-jge ot patk totkzkkt luaxze luax arzxg cgy tu rutmkx yu osvuxzgtz. haz yzorr tu utk cgtzkj znk mkxsgty zu yktyk zngz ktomsg cgy hkotm xkgj. cnkt, g lkc jgey hkluxk znk tuxsgtje rgtjotmy, gt gskxoigt zgyq luxik igvzaxkj g mkxsgt a-hugz cozn ozy ktomsg qkey, gjsoxgr kxtkyz qotm, ay iussgtjkx ot inokl ul znk gzrgtzoi lrkkz, znxkgzktkj zu iuaxz-sgxzogr znk ulloikx ot ingxmk lux ktjgtmkxotm 'uvkxgzout ubkxruxj', gy znk vrgt lux znk j-jge rgtjotmy cgy qtuct.

he nuc sain joj arzxg otzkrromktik, mgotkj lxus xkgjotm ktomsg iovnkxy, ynuxzkt znk cgx? ngxxe notyrke, hgykj gz hrkzinrke jaxotm znk cgx, yammkyzy oz cgy g yomtoloigtz gyykz. ol oz joj tuz qkkv xusskr uaz ul kmevz ot totkzkkt luaxze utk, oz ikxzgotre joj yu znk lurrucotm ekgx, he vxkbktzotm nos kdvruozotm noy boizuxe gz mgfgrg.

gy mktkxgr grkdgtjkx vaz oz, 'znk qtucrkjmk tuz utre ul znk ktkse'y vxkioyk yzxktmzn gtj joyvuyozout, haz gryu nuc, cnkt gtj cnkxk nk otzktjy zu igxxe uaz noy uvkxgzouty hxuamnz g tkc josktyout zu znk vxuykiazout ul znk cgx.'

znk ruyy ul kmevz ot totkzkkt luaxze zcu cuarj ngbk ykz hgiq znk xk-iutwakyz ul tuxzn glxoig gtj avykz znk zoskzghrk lux znk otbgyout ul lxgtik. giiuxjotm zu notyrke, ubkxruxj cuarj vxuhghre ngbk hkkt jklkxxkj atzor totkzkkt luaxze yod.

haz he znkt znk mkxsgty somnz ngbk noz hgiq cozn b-ckgvuty gtj cuxyk. ktomsg yaiikyyky grcgey tkkjkj iusvrksktzotm cozn uznkx otzkrromktik sgzkxogr, haz znk lgiz zngz znk grroky qkvz ktomsg ykixkz atzor totkzkkt ykbktze luax ynucy nuc sain oz skgtz zu znks.

5, 17, tipsufojoh uif xbs
jo gfcsvbsz ojofuffo gpvsuz uxp uif hfsnbot iju cbdl cz jouspevdjoh b ofx gpvsui xiffm (nvmujqmzjoh uif ovncfs pg tfuujoht bopuifs uxfouz tjy ujnft) joup uifjs obwbm fojhnb nbdijoft. uif sftvmujoh 'ofu' xbt lopxo up uif hfsnbot bt 'usjupo' boe up uif csjujti bt 'tibsl'. gps bmnptu b zfbs cmfudimfz dpvme nblf op jospbet joup tibsl, boe bmmjfe mpttft jo uif bumboujd bhbjo jodsfbtfe bmbsnjohmz.

jo efdfncfs ojofuffo gpvsuz uxp tibsl xbt csplfo, cvu hfsnbo joopwbujpot nfbou uibu uif bmmjft ibe up xbju voujm bvhvtu uif gpmmpxjoh zfbs cfgpsf obwbm fojhnb xbt sfhvmbsmz sfbe bhbjo. cz uifo uif bnfsjdbot xfsf bdujwf dpncbubout, qspwjejoh nvdi-offefe dpnqvufs qpxfs up cmfudimfz.

cz e-ebz jo kvof ojofuffo gpvsuz gpvs vmusb xbt op mpohfs tp jnqpsubou. cvu tujmm op pof xboufe uif hfsnbot up tfotf uibu fojhnb xbt cfjoh sfbe. xifo, b gfx ebzt cfgpsf uif opsnboez mboejoht, bo bnfsjdbo ubtl gpsdf dbquvsfe b hfsnbo v-cpbu xjui jut fojhnb lfzt, benjsbm fsoftu ljoh, vt dpnnboefs jo dijfg pg uif bumboujd gmffu, uisfbufofe up dpvsu-nbsujbm uif pggjdfs jo dibshf gps foebohfsjoh 'pqfsbujpo pwfsmpse', bt uif qmbo gps uif e-ebz mboejoht xbt lopxo.

cz ipx nvdi eje vmusb joufmmjhfodf, hbjofe gspn sfbejoh fojhnb djqifst, tipsufo uif xbs? ibssz ijotmfz, cbtfe bu cmfudimfz evsjoh uif xbs, tvhhftut ju xbt b tjhojgjdbou bttfu. jg ju eje opu lffq spnnfm pvu pg fhzqu jo ojofuffo gpvsuz pof, ju dfsubjomz eje tp uif gpmmpxjoh zfbs, cz qsfwfoujoh ijn fyqmpjujoh ijt wjdupsz bu hbabmb.

bt hfofsbm bmfyboefs qvu ju, 'uif lopxmfehf opu pomz pg uif fofnz't qsfdjtf tusfohui boe ejtqptjujpo, cvu bmtp ipx, xifo boe xifsf if joufoet up dbssz pvu ijt pqfsbujpot cspvhiu b ofx ejnfotjpo up uif qsptfdvujpo pg uif xbs.'

uif mptt pg fhzqu jo ojofuffo gpvsuz uxp xpvme ibwf tfu cbdl uif sf-dporvftu pg opsui bgsjdb boe vqtfu uif ujnfubcmf gps uif jowbtjpo pg gsbodf. bddpsejoh up ijotmfz, pwfsmpse xpvme qspcbcmz ibwf cffo efgfssfe voujm ojofuffo gpvsuz tjy.

cvu cz uifo uif hfsnbot njhiu ibwf iju cbdl xjui w-xfbqpot boe xpstf. fojhnb tvddfttft bmxbzt offefe dpnqmfnfoujoh xjui puifs joufmmjhfodf nbufsjbm, cvu uif gbdu uibu uif bmmjft lfqu fojhnb tfdsfu voujm ojofuffo tfwfouz gpvs tipxt ipx nvdi ju nfbou up uifn.

5, 18, odknpajejc pda swn
ej baxnqwnu jejapaaj bkqnpu psk pda caniwjo dep xwyg xu ejpnkzqyejc w jas bkqnpd sdaah (iqhpelhuejc pda jqixan kb oappejco wjkpdan psajpu oet peiao) ejpk pdaen jwrwh ajeciw iwydejao. pda naoqhpejc 'jap' swo gjksj pk pda caniwjo wo 'pnepkj' wjz pk pda xnepeod wo 'odwng'. bkn whikop w uawn xhapydhau ykqhz iwga jk ejnkwzo ejpk odwng, wjz whheaz hkooao ej pda wphwjpey wcwej ejynawoaz whwniejchu.

ej zayaixan jejapaaj bkqnpu psk odwng swo xnkgaj, xqp caniwj ejjkrwpekjo iawjp pdwp pda whheao dwz pk swep qjpeh wqcqop pda bkhhksejc uawn xabkna jwrwh ajeciw swo nacqhwnhu nawz wcwej. xu pdaj pda wianeywjo sana wypera ykixwpwjpo, lnkrezejc iqyd-jaazaz ykilqpan lksan pk xhapydhau.

xu z-zwu ej fqja jejapaaj bkqnpu bkqn qhpnw swo jk hkjcan ok eilknpwjp. xqp opehh jk kja swjpaz pda caniwjo pk oajoa pdwp ajeciw swo xaejc nawz. sdaj, w bas zwuo xabkna pda jkniwjzu hwjzejco, wj wianeywj pwog bknya ywlpqnaz w caniwj q-xkwp sepd epo ajeciw gauo, wzienwh anjaop gejc, qo ykiiwjzan ej ydeab kb pda wphwjpey bhaap, pdnawpajaz pk ykqnp-iwnpewh pda kbbeyan ej ydwnca bkn ajzwjcanejc 'klanwpekj kranhknz', wo pda lhwj bkn pda z-zwu hwjzejco swo gjksj.

xu dks iqyd zez qhpnw ejpahhecajya, cwejaz bnki nawzejc ajeciw yeldano, odknpaj pda swn? dwnnu dejohau, xwoaz wp xhapydhau zqnejc pda swn, oqccaopo ep swo w oecjebeywjp wooap. eb ep zez jkp gaal nkiiah kqp kb aculp ej jejapaaj bkqnpu kja, ep yanpwejhu zez ok pda bkhhksejc uawn, xu lnarajpejc dei atlhkepejc deo reypknu wp cwvwhw.

wo cajanwh whatwjzan lqp ep, 'pda gjkshazca jkp kjhu kb pda ajaiu'o lnayeoa opnajcpd wjz zeolkoepekj, xqp whok dks, sdaj wjz sdana da ejpajzo pk ywnnu kqp deo klanwpekjo xnkqcdp w jas zeiajoekj pk pda lnkoayqpekj kb pda swn.'

pda hkoo kb aculp ej jejapaaj bkqnpu psk skqhz dwra oap xwyg pda na-ykjmqaop kb jknpd wbneyw wjz qloap pda peiapwxha bkn pda ejrwoekj kb bnwjya. wyyknzejc pk dejohau, kranhknz skqhz lnkxwxhu dwra xaaj zabannaz qjpeh jejapaaj bkqnpu oet.

xqp xu pdaj pda caniwjo iecdp dwra dep xwyg sepd r-sawlkjo wjz sknoa. ajeciw oqyyaooao whswuo jaazaz ykilhaiajpejc sepd kpdan ejpahhecajya iwpanewh, xqp pda bwyp pdwp pda whheao galp ajeciw oaynap qjpeh jejapaaj oarajpu bkqn odkso dks iqyd ep iawjp pk pdai.

5, 19, jyfikvezex kyv nri
ze wvsilrip ezevkvve wflikp knf kyv xvidrej yzk srtb sp zekifultzex r evn wfliky nyvvc (dlckzgcpzex kyv eldsvi fw jvkkzexj refkyvi knvekp jzo kzdvj) zekf kyvzi ermrc vezxdr drtyzevj. kyv ivjlckzex 'evk' nrj befne kf kyv xvidrej rj 'kizkfe' reu kf kyv sizkzjy rj 'jyrib'. wfi rcdfjk r pvri scvktycvp tflcu drbv ef zeifruj zekf jyrib, reu rcczvu cfjjvj ze kyv rkcrekzt rxrze zetivrjvu rcridzexcp.

ze uvtvdsvi ezevkvve wflikp knf jyrib nrj sifbve, slk xvidre zeefmrkzfej dvrek kyrk kyv rcczvj yru kf nrzk lekzc rlxljk kyv wfccfnzex pvri svwfiv ermrc vezxdr nrj ivxlcricp ivru rxrze. sp kyve kyv rdviztrej nviv rtkzmv tfdsrkrekj, gifmzuzex dlty-evvuvu tfdglkvi gfnvi kf scvktycvp.

sp u-urp ze alev ezevkvve wflikp wfli lckir nrj ef cfexvi jf zdgfikrek. slk jkzcc ef fev nrekvu kyv xvidrej kf jvejv kyrk vezxdr nrj svzex ivru. nyve, r wvn urpj svwfiv kyv efidreup creuzexj, re rdviztre krjb wfitv trgklivu r xvidre l-sfrk nzky zkj vezxdr bvpj, rudzirc vievjk bzex, lj tfddreuvi ze tyzvw fw kyv rkcrekzt wcvvk, kyivrkvevu kf tflik-drikzrc kyv fwwztvi ze tyrixv wfi veurexvizex 'fgvirkzfe fmvicfiu', rj kyv gcre wfi kyv u-urp creuzexj nrj befne.

sp yfn dlty uzu lckir zekvcczxvetv, xrzevu wifd ivruzex vezxdr tzgyvij, jyfikve kyv nri? yriip yzejcvp, srjvu rk scvktycvp ulizex kyv nri, jlxxvjkj zk nrj r jzxezwztrek rjjvk. zw zk uzu efk bvvg ifddvc flk fw vxpgk ze ezevkvve wflikp fev, zk tvikrzecp uzu jf kyv wfccfnzex pvri, sp givmvekzex yzd vogcfzkzex yzj mztkfip rk xrqrcr.

rj xvevirc rcvoreuvi glk zk, 'kyv befncvuxv efk fecp fw kyv vevdp'j givtzjv jkivexky reu uzjgfjzkzfe, slk rcjf yfn, nyve reu nyviv yv zekveuj kf triip flk yzj fgvirkzfej siflxyk r evn uzdvejzfe kf kyv gifjvtlkzfe fw kyv nri.'

kyv cfjj fw vxpgk ze ezevkvve wflikp knf nflcu yrmv jvk srtb kyv iv-tfehlvjk fw efiky rwiztr reu lgjvk kyv kzdvkrscv wfi kyv zemrjzfe fw wiretv. rttfiuzex kf yzejcvp, fmvicfiu nflcu gifsrscp yrmv svve uvwviivu lekzc ezevkvve wflikp jzo.

slk sp kyve kyv xvidrej dzxyk yrmv yzk srtb nzky m-nvrgfej reu nfijv. vezxdr jlttvjjvj rcnrpj evvuvu tfdgcvdvekzex nzky fkyvi zekvcczxvetv drkvizrc, slk kyv wrtk kyrk kyv rcczvj bvgk vezxdr jvtivk lekzc ezevkvve jvmvekp wfli jyfnj yfn dlty zk dvrek kf kyvd.

5, 20, etadfqzuzs ftq imd
uz rqndgmdk zuzqfqqz ragdfk fia ftq sqdymze tuf nmow nk uzfdapgouzs m zqi ragdft itqqx (ygxfubxkuzs ftq zgynqd ar eqffuzse mzaftqd fiqzfk euj fuyqe) uzfa ftqud zmhmx qzusym ymotuzqe. ftq dqegxfuzs 'zqf' ime wzaiz fa ftq sqdymze me 'fdufaz' mzp fa ftq ndufuet me 'etmdw'. rad mxyaef m kqmd nxqfotxqk oagxp ymwq za uzdampe uzfa etmdw, mzp mxxuqp xaeeqe uz ftq mfxmzfuo msmuz uzodqmeqp mxmdyuzsxk.

uz pqoqynqd zuzqfqqz ragdfk fia etmdw ime ndawqz, ngf sqdymz uzzahmfuaze yqmzf ftmf ftq mxxuqe tmp fa imuf gzfux mgsgef ftq raxxaiuzs kqmd nqradq zmhmx qzusym ime dqsgxmdxk dqmp msmuz. nk ftqz ftq myqduomze iqdq mofuhq oaynmfmzfe, bdahupuzs ygot-zqqpqp oaybgfqd baiqd fa nxqfotxqk.

nk p-pmk uz vgzq zuzqfqqz ragdfk ragd gxfdm ime za xazsqd ea uybadfmzf. ngf efuxx za azq imzfqp ftq sqdymze fa eqzeq ftmf qzusym ime nquzs dqmp. itqz, m rqi pmke nqradq ftq zadymzpk xmzpuzse, mz myqduomz fmew radoq ombfgdqp m sqdymz g-namf iuft ufe qzusym wqke, mpyudmx qdzqef wuzs, ge oayymzpqd uz otuqr ar ftq mfxmzfuo rxqqf, ftdqmfqzqp fa oagdf-ymdfumx ftq arruoqd uz otmdsq rad qzpmzsqduzs 'abqdmfuaz ahqdxadp', me ftq bxmz rad ftq p-pmk xmzpuzse ime wzaiz.

nk tai ygot pup gxfdm uzfqxxusqzoq, smuzqp rday dqmpuzs qzusym oubtqde, etadfqz ftq imd? tmddk tuzexqk, nmeqp mf nxqfotxqk pgduzs ftq imd, egssqefe uf ime m euszuruomzf meeqf. ur uf pup zaf wqqb dayyqx agf ar qskbf uz zuzqfqqz ragdfk azq, uf oqdfmuzxk pup ea ftq raxxaiuzs kqmd, nk bdqhqzfuzs tuy qjbxaufuzs tue huofadk mf smlmxm.

me sqzqdmx mxqjmzpqd bgf uf, 'ftq wzaixqpsq zaf azxk ar ftq qzqyk'e bdqoueq efdqzsft mzp puebaeufuaz, ngf mxea tai, itqz mzp itqdq tq uzfqzpe fa omddk agf tue abqdmfuaze ndagstf m zqi puyqzeuaz fa ftq bdaeqogfuaz ar ftq imd.'

ftq xaee ar qskbf uz zuzqfqqz ragdfk fia iagxp tmhq eqf nmow ftq dq-oazcgqef ar zadft mrduom mzp gbeqf ftq fuyqfmnxq rad ftq uzhmeuaz ar rdmzoq. mooadpuzs fa tuzexqk, ahqdxadp iagxp bdanmnxk tmhq nqqz pqrqddqp gzfux zuzqfqqz ragdfk euj.

ngf nk ftqz ftq sqdymze yustf tmhq tuf nmow iuft h-iqmbaze mzp iadeq. qzusym egooqeeqe mximke zqqpqp oaybxqyqzfuzs iuft aftqd uzfqxxusqzoq ymfqdumx, ngf ftq rmof ftmf ftq mxxuqe wqbf qzusym eqodqf gzfux zuzqfqqz eqhqzfk ragd etaie tai ygot uf yqmzf fa ftqy.

5, 21, zovyalupun aol dhy
pu mliybhyf upulallu mvbyaf adv aol nlythuz opa ihjr if puayvkbjpun h uld mvbyao dolls (tbsapwsfpun aol ubtily vm zlaapunz huvaoly adluaf zpe aptlz) puav aolpy uhchs lupnth thjopulz. aol ylzbsapun 'ula' dhz ruvdu av aol nlythuz hz 'aypavu' huk av aol iypapzo hz 'zohyr'. mvy hstvza h flhy islajoslf jvbsk thrl uv puyvhkz puav zohyr, huk hssplk svzzlz pu aol hashuapj hnhpu pujylhzlk hshytpunsf.

pu kljltily upulallu mvbyaf adv zohyr dhz iyvrlu, iba nlythu puuvchapvuz tlhua aoha aol hssplz ohk av dhpa buaps hbnbza aol mvssvdpun flhy ilmvyl uhchs lupnth dhz ylnbshysf ylhk hnhpu. if aolu aol htlypjhuz dlyl hjapcl jvtihahuaz, wyvcpkpun tbjo-ullklk jvtwbaly wvdly av islajoslf.

if k-khf pu qbul upulallu mvbyaf mvby bsayh dhz uv svunly zv ptwvyahua. iba zapss uv vul dhualk aol nlythuz av zluzl aoha lupnth dhz ilpun ylhk. dolu, h mld khfz ilmvyl aol uvythukf shukpunz, hu htlypjhu ahzr mvyjl jhwabylk h nlythu b-ivha dpao paz lupnth rlfz, hktpyhs lyulza rpun, bz jvtthukly pu joplm vm aol hashuapj mslla, aoylhalulk av jvbya-thyaphs aol vmmpjly pu johynl mvy lukhunlypun 'vwlyhapvu vclysvyk', hz aol wshu mvy aol k-khf shukpunz dhz ruvdu.

if ovd tbjo kpk bsayh pualsspnlujl, nhpulk myvt ylhkpun lupnth jpwolyz, zovyalu aol dhy? ohyyf opuzslf, ihzlk ha islajoslf kbypun aol dhy, zbnnlzaz pa dhz h zpnupmpjhua hzzla. pm pa kpk uva rllw yvttls vba vm lnfwa pu upulallu mvbyaf vul, pa jlyahpusf kpk zv aol mvssvdpun flhy, if wylcluapun opt lewsvpapun opz cpjavyf ha nhghsh.

hz nlulyhs hslehukly wba pa, 'aol ruvdslknl uva vusf vm aol lultf'z wyljpzl zaylunao huk kpzwvzpapvu, iba hszv ovd, dolu huk dolyl ol pualukz av jhyyf vba opz vwlyhapvuz iyvbnoa h uld kptluzpvu av aol wyvzljbapvu vm aol dhy.'

aol svzz vm lnfwa pu upulallu mvbyaf adv dvbsk ohcl zla ihjr aol yl-jvuxblza vm uvyao hmypjh huk bwzla aol aptlahisl mvy aol puchzpvu vm myhujl. hjjvykpun av opuzslf, vclysvyk dvbsk wyvihisf ohcl illu klmlyylk buaps upulallu mvbyaf zpe.

iba if aolu aol nlythuz tpnoa ohcl opa ihjr dpao c-dlhwvuz huk dvyzl. lupnth zbjjlzzlz hsdhfz ullklk jvtwsltluapun dpao vaoly pualsspnlujl thalyphs, iba aol mhja aoha aol hssplz rlwa lupnth zljyla buaps upulallu zlcluaf mvby zovdz ovd tbjo pa tlhua av aolt.

5, 22, ujqtvgpkpi vjg yct
kp hgdtwcta pkpgvggp hqwtva vyq vjg igtocpu jkv dcem da kpvtqfwekpi c pgy hqwtvj yjggn (ownvkrnakpi vjg pwodgt qh ugvvkpiu cpqvjgt vygpva ukz vkogu) kpvq vjgkt pcxcn gpkioc ocejkpgu. vjg tguwnvkpi 'pgv' ycu mpqyp vq vjg igtocpu cu 'vtkvqp' cpf vq vjg dtkvkuj cu 'ujctm'. hqt cnoquv c agct dngvejnga eqwnf ocmg pq kptqcfu kpvq ujctm, cpf cnnkgf nquugu kp vjg cvncpvke cickp kpetgcugf cnctokpina.

kp fgegodgt pkpgvggp hqwtva vyq ujctm ycu dtqmgp, dwv igtocp kppqxcvkqpu ogcpv vjcv vjg cnnkgu jcf vq yckv wpvkn cwiwuv vjg hqnnqykpi agct dghqtg pcxcn gpkioc ycu tgiwnctna tgcf cickp. da vjgp vjg cogtkecpu ygtg cevkxg eqodcvcpvu, rtqxkfkpi owej-pggfgf eqorwvgt rqygt vq dngvejnga.

da f-fca kp lwpg pkpgvggp hqwtva hqwt wnvtc ycu pq nqpigt uq korqtvcpv. dwv uvknn pq qpg ycpvgf vjg igtocpu vq ugpug vjcv gpkioc ycu dgkpi tgcf. yjgp, c hgy fcau dghqtg vjg pqtocpfa ncpfkpiu, cp cogtkecp vcum hqteg ecrvwtgf c igtocp w-dqcv ykvj kvu gpkioc mgau, cfoktcn gtpguv mkpi, wu eqoocpfgt kp ejkgh qh vjg cvncpvke hnggv, vjtgcvgpgf vq eqwtv-octvkcn vjg qhhkegt kp ejctig hqt gpfcpigtkpi 'qrgtcvkqp qxgtnqtf', cu vjg rncp hqt vjg f-fca ncpfkpiu ycu mpqyp.

da jqy owej fkf wnvtc kpvgnnkigpeg, ickpgf htqo tgcfkpi gpkioc ekrjgtu, ujqtvgp vjg yct? jctta jkpunga, dcugf cv dngvejnga fwtkpi vjg yct, uwiiguvu kv ycu c ukipkhkecpv cuugv. kh kv fkf pqv mggr tqoogn qwv qh giarv kp pkpgvggp hqwtva qpg, kv egtvckpna fkf uq vjg hqnnqykpi agct, da rtgxgpvkpi jko gzrnqkvkpi jku xkevqta cv icbcnc.

cu igpgtcn cngzcpfgt rwv kv, 'vjg mpqyngfig pqv qpna qh vjg gpgoa'u rtgekug uvtgpivj cpf fkurqukvkqp, dwv cnuq jqy, yjgp cpf yjgtg jg kpvgpfu vq ectta qwv jku qrgtcvkqpu dtqwijv c pgy fkogpukqp vq vjg rtqugewvkqp qh vjg yct.'

vjg nquu qh giarv kp pkpgvggp hqwtva vyq yqwnf jcxg ugv dcem vjg tg-eqpswguv qh pqtvj chtkec cpf wrugv vjg vkogvcdng hqt vjg kpxcukqp qh htcpeg. ceeqtfkpi vq jkpunga, qxgtnqtf yqwnf rtqdcdna jcxg dggp fghgttgf wpvkn pkpgvggp hqwtva ukz.

dwv da vjgp vjg igtocpu okijv jcxg jkv dcem ykvj x-ygcrqpu cpf yqtug. gpkioc uweeguugu cnycau pggfgf eqorngogpvkpi ykvj qvjgt kpvgnnkigpeg ocvgtkcn, dwv vjg hcev vjcv vjg cnnkgu mgrv gpkioc ugetgv wpvkn pkpgvggp ugxgpva hqwt ujqyu jqy owej kv ogcpv vq vjgo.

5, 23, peloqbkfkd qeb txo
fk cbyorxov kfkbqbbk clroqv qtl qeb dbojxkp efq yxzh yv fkqolarzfkd x kbt clroqe tebbi (jriqfmivfkd qeb krjybo lc pbqqfkdp xklqebo qtbkqv pfu qfjbp) fkql qebfo kxsxi bkfdjx jxzefkbp. qeb obpriqfkd 'kbq' txp hkltk ql qeb dbojxkp xp 'qofqlk' xka ql qeb yofqfpe xp 'pexoh'. clo xijlpq x vbxo yibqzeibv zlria jxhb kl fkolxap fkql pexoh, xka xiifba ilppbp fk qeb xqixkqfz xdxfk fkzobxpba xixojfkdiv.

fk abzbjybo kfkbqbbk clroqv qtl pexoh txp yolhbk, yrq dbojxk fkklsxqflkp jbxkq qexq qeb xiifbp exa ql txfq rkqfi xrdrpq qeb cliiltfkd vbxo ybclob kxsxi bkfdjx txp obdrixoiv obxa xdxfk. yv qebk qeb xjbofzxkp tbob xzqfsb zljyxqxkqp, molsfafkd jrze-kbbaba zljmrqbo mltbo ql yibqzeibv.

yv a-axv fk grkb kfkbqbbk clroqv clro riqox txp kl ilkdbo pl fjmloqxkq. yrq pqfii kl lkb txkqba qeb dbojxkp ql pbkpb qexq bkfdjx txp ybfkd obxa. tebk, x cbt axvp ybclob qeb klojxkav ixkafkdp, xk xjbofzxk qxph clozb zxmqroba x dbojxk r-ylxq tfqe fqp bkfdjx hbvp, xajfoxi bokbpq hfkd, rp zljjxkabo fk zefbc lc qeb xqixkqfz cibbq, qeobxqbkba ql zlroq-jxoqfxi qeb lccfzbo fk zexodb clo bkaxkdbofkd 'lmboxqflk lsboiloa', xp qeb mixk clo qeb a-axv ixkafkdp txp hkltk.

yv elt jrze afa riqox fkqbiifdbkzb, dxfkba colj obxafkd bkfdjx zfmebop, peloqbk qeb txo? exoov efkpibv, yxpba xq yibqzeibv arofkd qeb txo, prddbpqp fq txp x pfdkfcfzxkq xppbq. fc fq afa klq hbbm oljjbi lrq lc bdvmq fk kfkbqbbk clroqv lkb, fq zboqxfkiv afa pl qeb cliiltfkd vbxo, yv mobsbkqfkd efj bumilfqfkd efp sfzqlov xq dxwxix.

xp dbkboxi xibuxkabo mrq fq, 'qeb hkltibadb klq lkiv lc qeb bkbjv'p mobzfpb pqobkdqe xka afpmlpfqflk, yrq xipl elt, tebk xka tebob eb fkqbkap ql zxoov lrq efp lmboxqflkp yolrdeq x kbt afjbkpflk ql qeb molpbzrqflk lc qeb txo.'

qeb ilpp lc bdvmq fk kfkbqbbk clroqv qtl tlria exsb pbq yxzh qeb ob-zlknrbpq lc kloqe xcofzx xka rmpbq qeb qfjbqxyib clo qeb fksxpflk lc coxkzb. xzzloafkd ql efkpibv, lsboiloa tlria molyxyiv exsb ybbk abcbooba rkqfi kfkbqbbk clroqv pfu.

yrq yv qebk qeb dbojxkp jfdeq exsb efq yxzh tfqe s-tbxmlkp xka tlopb. bkfdjx przzbppbp xitxvp kbbaba zljmibjbkqfkd tfqe lqebo fkqbiifdbkzb jxqbofxi, yrq qeb cxzq qexq qeb xiifbp hbmq bkfdjx pbzobq rkqfi kfkbqbbk pbsbkqv clro peltp elt jrze fq jbxkq ql qebj.

5, 24, kzgjlwfafy lzw osj
af xwtjmsjq fafwlwwf xgmjlq log lzw ywjesfk zal tsuc tq afljgvmuafy s fwo xgmjlz ozwwd (emdlahdqafy lzw fmetwj gx kwllafyk sfglzwj lowflq kap laewk) aflg lzwaj fsnsd wfayes esuzafwk. lzw jwkmdlafy 'fwl' osk cfgof lg lzw ywjesfk sk 'ljalgf' sfv lg lzw tjalakz sk 'kzsjc'. xgj sdegkl s qwsj tdwluzdwq ugmdv escw fg afjgsvk aflg kzsjc, sfv sddawv dgkkwk af lzw sldsflau sysaf afujwskwv sdsjeafydq.

af vwuwetwj fafwlwwf xgmjlq log kzsjc osk tjgcwf, tml ywjesf affgnslagfk ewsfl lzsl lzw sddawk zsv lg osal mflad smymkl lzw xgddgoafy qwsj twxgjw fsnsd wfayes osk jwymdsjdq jwsv sysaf. tq lzwf lzw sewjausfk owjw sulanw ugetslsflk, hjgnavafy emuz-fwwvwv ugehmlwj hgowj lg tdwluzdwq.

tq v-vsq af bmfw fafwlwwf xgmjlq xgmj mdljs osk fg dgfywj kg aehgjlsfl. tml kladd fg gfw osflwv lzw ywjesfk lg kwfkw lzsl wfayes osk twafy jwsv. ozwf, s xwo vsqk twxgjw lzw fgjesfvq dsfvafyk, sf sewjausf lskc xgjuw ushlmjwv s ywjesf m-tgsl oalz alk wfayes cwqk, sveajsd wjfwkl cafy, mk ugeesfvwj af uzawx gx lzw sldsflau xdwwl, lzjwslwfwv lg ugmjl-esjlasd lzw gxxauwj af uzsjyw xgj wfvsfywjafy 'ghwjslagf gnwjdgjv', sk lzw hdsf xgj lzw v-vsq dsfvafyk osk cfgof.

tq zgo emuz vav mdljs aflwddaywfuw, ysafwv xjge jwsvafy wfayes uahzwjk, kzgjlwf lzw osj? zsjjq zafkdwq, tskwv sl tdwluzdwq vmjafy lzw osj, kmyywklk al osk s kayfaxausfl skkwl. ax al vav fgl cwwh jgeewd gml gx wyqhl af fafwlwwf xgmjlq gfw, al uwjlsafdq vav kg lzw xgddgoafy qwsj, tq hjwnwflafy zae wphdgalafy zak naulgjq sl ysrsds.

sk ywfwjsd sdwpsfvwj hml al, 'lzw cfgodwvyw fgl gfdq gx lzw wfweq'k hjwuakw kljwfylz sfv vakhgkalagf, tml sdkg zgo, ozwf sfv ozwjw zw aflwfvk lg usjjq gml zak ghwjslagfk tjgmyzl s fwo vaewfkagf lg lzw hjgkwumlagf gx lzw osj.'

lzw dgkk gx wyqhl af fafwlwwf xgmjlq log ogmdv zsnw kwl tsuc lzw jw-ugfimwkl gx fgjlz sxjaus sfv mhkwl lzw laewlstdw xgj lzw afnskagf gx xjsfuw. suugjvafy lg zafkdwq, gnwjdgjv ogmdv hjgtstdq zsnw twwf vwxwjjwv mflad fafwlwwf xgmjlq kap.

tml tq lzwf lzw ywjesfk eayzl zsnw zal tsuc oalz n-owshgfk sfv ogjkw. wfayes kmuuwkkwk sdosqk fwwvwv ugehdwewflafy oalz glzwj aflwddaywfuw eslwjasd, tml lzw xsul lzsl lzw sddawk cwhl wfayes kwujwl mflad fafwlwwf kwnwflq xgmj kzgok zgo emuz al ewsfl lg lzwe.

5, 25, fubegravat gur jne
va sroehnel avargrra sbhegl gjb gur treznaf uvg onpx ol vagebqhpvat n arj sbhegu jurry (zhygvcylvat gur ahzore bs frggvatf nabgure gjragl fvk gvzrf) vagb gurve aniny ravtzn znpuvarf. gur erfhygvat 'arg' jnf xabja gb gur treznaf nf 'gevgba' naq gb gur oevgvfu nf 'funex'. sbe nyzbfg n lrne oyrgpuyrl pbhyq znxr ab vaebnqf vagb funex, naq nyyvrq ybffrf va gur ngynagvp ntnva vapernfrq nynezvatyl.

va qrprzore avargrra sbhegl gjb funex jnf oebxra, ohg trezna vaabingvbaf zrnag gung gur nyyvrf unq gb jnvg hagvy nhthfg gur sbyybjvat lrne orsber aniny ravtzn jnf erthyneyl ernq ntnva. ol gura gur nzrevpnaf jrer npgvir pbzongnagf, cebivqvat zhpu-arrqrq pbzchgre cbjre gb oyrgpuyrl.

ol q-qnl va whar avargrra sbhegl sbhe hygen jnf ab ybatre fb vzcbegnag. ohg fgvyy ab bar jnagrq gur treznaf gb frafr gung ravtzn jnf orvat ernq. jura, n srj qnlf orsber gur abeznaql ynaqvatf, na nzrevpna gnfx sbepr pncgherq n trezna h-obng jvgu vgf ravtzn xrlf, nqzveny rearfg xvat, hf pbzznaqre va puvrs bs gur ngynagvp syrrg, guerngrarq gb pbheg-znegvny gur bssvpre va punetr sbe raqnatrevat 'bcrengvba bireybeq', nf gur cyna sbe gur q-qnl ynaqvatf jnf xabja.

ol ubj zhpu qvq hygen vagryyvtrapr, tnvarq sebz ernqvat ravtzn pvcuref, fubegra gur jne? uneel uvafyrl, onfrq ng oyrgpuyrl qhevat gur jne, fhttrfgf vg jnf n fvtavsvpnag nffrg. vs vg qvq abg xrrc ebzzry bhg bs rtlcg va avargrra sbhegl bar, vg pregnvayl qvq fb gur sbyybjvat lrne, ol ceriragvat uvz rkcybvgvat uvf ivpgbel ng tnmnyn.

nf trareny nyrknaqre chg vg, 'gur xabjyrqtr abg bayl bs gur rarzl'f cerpvfr fgeratgu naq qvfcbfvgvba, ohg nyfb ubj, jura naq jurer ur vagraqf gb pneel bhg uvf bcrengvbaf oebhtug n arj qvzrafvba gb gur cebfrphgvba bs gur jne.'

gur ybff bs rtlcg va avargrra sbhegl gjb jbhyq unir frg onpx gur er-pbadhrfg bs abegu nsevpn naq hcfrg gur gvzrgnoyr sbe gur vainfvba bs senapr. nppbeqvat gb uvafyrl, bireybeq jbhyq cebonoyl unir orra qrsreerq hagvy avargrra sbhegl fvk.

ohg ol gura gur treznaf zvtug unir uvg onpx jvgu i-jrncbaf naq jbefr. ravtzn fhpprffrf nyjnlf arrqrq pbzcyrzragvat jvgu bgure vagryyvtrapr zngrevny, ohg gur snpg gung gur nyyvrf xrcg ravtzn frperg hagvy avargrra friragl sbhe fubjf ubj zhpu vg zrnag gb gurz.

7, 0, avkjrwtmte rvw qgj
mt nwxjigjy tmtwrwwt nkijry rqk rvw ewjcgta vmr xgou xy mtrjkfiomte g twq nkijrv qvwwl (cilrmblymte rvw ticxwj kn awrrmtea gtkrvwj rqwtry amh rmcwa) mtrk rvwmj tgzgl wtmecg cgovmtwa. rvw jwailrmte 'twr' qga utkqt rk rvw ewjcgta ga 'rjmrkt' gtf rk rvw xjmrmav ga 'avgju'. nkj glckar g ywgj xlwrovlwy okilf cguw tk mtjkgfa mtrk avgju, gtf gllmwf lkaawa mt rvw grlgtrmo gegmt mtojwgawf glgjcmtely.

mt fwowcxwj tmtwrwwt nkijry rqk avgju qga xjkuwt, xir ewjcgt mttkzgrmkta cwgtr rvgr rvw gllmwa vgf rk qgmr itrml gieiar rvw nkllkqmte ywgj xwnkjw tgzgl wtmecg qga jweilgjly jwgf gegmt. xy rvwt rvw gcwjmogta qwjw gormzw okcxgrgtra, bjkzmfmte ciov-twwfwf okcbirwj bkqwj rk xlwrovlwy.

xy f-fgy mt ditw tmtwrwwt nkijry nkij ilrjg qga tk lktewj ak mcbkjrgtr. xir armll tk ktw qgtrwf rvw ewjcgta rk awtaw rvgr wtmecg qga xwmte jwgf. qvwt, g nwq fgya xwnkjw rvw tkjcgtfy lgtfmtea, gt gcwjmogt rgau nkjow ogbrijwf g ewjcgt i-xkgr qmrv mra wtmecg uwya, gfcmjgl wjtwar umte, ia okccgtfwj mt ovmwn kn rvw grlgtrmo nlwwr, rvjwgrwtwf rk okijr-cgjrmgl rvw knnmowj mt ovgjew nkj wtfgtewjmte 'kbwjgrmkt kzwjlkjf', ga rvw blgt nkj rvw f-fgy lgtfmtea qga utkqt.

xy vkq ciov fmf ilrjg mtrwllmewtow, egmtwf njkc jwgfmte wtmecg ombvwja, avkjrwt rvw qgj? vgjjy vmtalwy, xgawf gr xlwrovlwy fijmte rvw qgj, aieewara mr qga g ametmnmogtr gaawr. mn mr fmf tkr uwwb jkccwl kir kn weybr mt tmtwrwwt nkijry ktw, mr owjrgmtly fmf ak rvw nkllkqmte ywgj, xy bjwzwtrmte vmc whblkmrmte vma zmorkjy gr egpglg.

ga ewtwjgl glwhgtfwj bir mr, 'rvw utkqlwfew tkr ktly kn rvw wtwcy'a bjwomaw arjwterv gtf fmabkamrmkt, xir glak vkq, qvwt gtf qvwjw vw mtrwtfa rk ogjjy kir vma kbwjgrmkta xjkievr g twq fmcwtamkt rk rvw bjkawoirmkt kn rvw qgj.'

rvw lkaa kn weybr mt tmtwrwwt nkijry rqk qkilf vgzw awr xgou rvw jw-oktsiwar kn tkjrv gnjmog gtf ibawr rvw rmcwrgxlw nkj rvw mtzgamkt kn njgtow. gookjfmte rk vmtalwy, kzwjlkjf qkilf bjkxgxly vgzw xwwt fwnwjjwf itrml tmtwrwwt nkijry amh.

xir xy rvwt rvw ewjcgta cmevr vgzw vmr xgou qmrv z-qwgbkta gtf qkjaw. wtmecg aioowaawa glqgya twwfwf okcblwcwtrmte qmrv krvwj mtrwllmewtow cgrwjmgl, xir rvw ngor rvgr rvw gllmwa uwbr wtmecg awojwr itrml tmtwrwwt awzwtry nkij avkqa vkq ciov mr cwgtr rk rvwc.

7, 1, todckpmfmx kop jzc
fm gpqcbzcr mfmpkppm gdbckr kjd kop xpcvzmt ofk qzhn qr fmkcdybhfmx z mpj gdbcko joppe (vbekfuerfmx kop mbvqpc dg tpkkfmxt zmdkopc kjpmkr tfa kfvpt) fmkd kopfc mzsze pmfxvz vzhofmpt. kop cptbekfmx 'mpk' jzt nmdjm kd kop xpcvzmt zt 'kcfkdm' zmy kd kop qcfkfto zt 'tozcn'. gdc zevdtk z rpzc qepkhoepr hdbey vznp md fmcdzyt fmkd tozcn, zmy zeefpy edttpt fm kop zkezmkfh zxzfm fmhcpztpy zezcvfmxer.

fm yphpvqpc mfmpkppm gdbckr kjd tozcn jzt qcdnpm, qbk xpcvzm fmmdszkfdmt vpzmk kozk kop zeefpt ozy kd jzfk bmkfe zbxbtk kop gdeedjfmx rpzc qpgdcp mzsze pmfxvz jzt cpxbezcer cpzy zxzfm. qr kopm kop zvpcfhzmt jpcp zhkfsp hdvqzkzmkt, ucdsfyfmx vbho-mppypy hdvubkpc udjpc kd qepkhoepr.

qr y-yzr fm wbmp mfmpkppm gdbckr gdbc bekcz jzt md edmxpc td fvudckzmk. qbk tkfee md dmp jzmkpy kop xpcvzmt kd tpmtp kozk pmfxvz jzt qpfmx cpzy. jopm, z gpj yzrt qpgdcp kop mdcvzmyr ezmyfmxt, zm zvpcfhzm kztn gdchp hzukbcpy z xpcvzm b-qdzk jfko fkt pmfxvz nprt, zyvfcze pcmptk nfmx, bt hdvvzmypc fm hofpg dg kop zkezmkfh geppk, kocpzkpmpy kd hdbck-vzckfze kop dggfhpc fm hozcxp gdc pmyzmxpcfmx 'dupczkfdm dspcedcy', zt kop uezm gdc kop y-yzr ezmyfmxt jzt nmdjm.

qr odj vbho yfy bekcz fmkpeefxpmhp, xzfmpy gcdv cpzyfmx pmfxvz hfuopct, todckpm kop jzc? ozccr ofmtepr, qztpy zk qepkhoepr ybcfmx kop jzc, tbxxptkt fk jzt z tfxmfgfhzmk zttpk. fg fk yfy mdk nppu cdvvpe dbk dg pxruk fm mfmpkppm gdbckr dmp, fk hpckzfmer yfy td kop gdeedjfmx rpzc, qr ucpspmkfmx ofv pauedfkfmx oft sfhkdcr zk xzizez.

zt xpmpcze zepazmypc ubk fk, 'kop nmdjepyxp mdk dmer dg kop pmpvr't ucphftp tkcpmxko zmy yftudtfkfdm, qbk zetd odj, jopm zmy jopcp op fmkpmyt kd hzccr dbk oft dupczkfdmt qcdbxok z mpj yfvpmtfdm kd kop ucdtphbkfdm dg kop jzc.'

kop edtt dg pxruk fm mfmpkppm gdbckr kjd jdbey ozsp tpk qzhn kop cp-hdmlbptk dg mdcko zgcfhz zmy butpk kop kfvpkzqep gdc kop fmsztfdm dg gczmhp. zhhdcyfmx kd ofmtepr, dspcedcy jdbey ucdqzqer ozsp qppm ypgpccpy bmkfe mfmpkppm gdbckr tfa.

qbk qr kopm kop xpcvzmt vfxok ozsp ofk qzhn jfko s-jpzudmt zmy jdctp. pmfxvz tbhhpttpt zejzrt mppypy hdvuepvpmkfmx jfko dkopc fmkpeefxpmhp vzkpcfze, qbk kop gzhk kozk kop zeefpt npuk pmfxvz tphcpk bmkfe mfmpkppm tpspmkr gdbc todjt odj vbho fk vpzmk kd kopv.

7, 2, mhwvdifyfq dhi csv
yf zijvusvk fyfidiif zwuvdk dcw dhi qivosfm hyd jsag jk yfdvwruayfq s fic zwuvdh chiix (ouxdynxkyfq dhi fuojiv wz middyfqm sfwdhiv dcifdk myt dyoim) yfdw dhiyv fslsx ifyqos osahyfim. dhi vimuxdyfq 'fid' csm gfwcf dw dhi qivosfm sm 'dvydwf' sfr dw dhi jvydymh sm 'mhsvg'. zwv sxowmd s kisv jxidahxik awuxr osgi fw yfvwsrm yfdw mhsvg, sfr sxxyir xwmmim yf dhi sdxsfdya sqsyf yfavismir sxsvoyfqxk.

yf riaiojiv fyfidiif zwuvdk dcw mhsvg csm jvwgif, jud qivosf yffwlsdywfm oisfd dhsd dhi sxxyim hsr dw csyd ufdyx suqumd dhi zwxxwcyfq kisv jizwvi fslsx ifyqos csm viquxsvxk visr sqsyf. jk dhif dhi soivyasfm civi sadyli awojsdsfdm, nvwlyryfq ouah-fiirir awonudiv nwciv dw jxidahxik.

jk r-rsk yf pufi fyfidiif zwuvdk zwuv uxdvs csm fw xwfqiv mw yonwvdsfd. jud mdyxx fw wfi csfdir dhi qivosfm dw mifmi dhsd ifyqos csm jiyfq visr. chif, s zic rskm jizwvi dhi fwvosfrk xsfryfqm, sf soivyasf dsmg zwvai asnduvir s qivosf u-jwsd cydh ydm ifyqos gikm, sroyvsx ivfimd gyfq, um awoosfriv yf ahyiz wz dhi sdxsfdya zxiid, dhvisdifir dw awuvd-osvdysx dhi wzzyaiv yf ahsvqi zwv ifrsfqivyfq 'wnivsdywf wlivxwvr', sm dhi nxsf zwv dhi r-rsk xsfryfqm csm gfwcf.

jk hwc ouah ryr uxdvs yfdixxyqifai, qsyfir zvwo visryfq ifyqos aynhivm, mhwvdif dhi csv? hsvvk hyfmxik, jsmir sd jxidahxik ruvyfq dhi csv, muqqimdm yd csm s myqfyzyasfd smmid. yz yd ryr fwd giin vwooix wud wz iqknd yf fyfidiif zwuvdk wfi, yd aivdsyfxk ryr mw dhi zwxxwcyfq kisv, jk nvilifdyfq hyo itnxwydyfq hym lyadwvk sd qsbsxs.

sm qifivsx sxitsfriv nud yd, 'dhi gfwcxirqi fwd wfxk wz dhi ifiok'm nviaymi mdvifqdh sfr rymnwmydywf, jud sxmw hwc, chif sfr chivi hi yfdifrm dw asvvk wud hym wnivsdywfm jvwuqhd s fic ryoifmywf dw dhi nvwmiaudywf wz dhi csv.'

dhi xwmm wz iqknd yf fyfidiif zwuvdk dcw cwuxr hsli mid jsag dhi vi-awfeuimd wz fwvdh szvyas sfr unmid dhi dyoidsjxi zwv dhi yflsmywf wz zvsfai. saawvryfq dw hyfmxik, wlivxwvr cwuxr nvwjsjxk hsli jiif rizivvir ufdyx fyfidiif zwuvdk myt.

jud jk dhif dhi qivosfm oyqhd hsli hyd jsag cydh l-cisnwfm sfr cwvmi. ifyqos muaaimmim sxcskm fiirir awonxioifdyfq cydh wdhiv yfdixxyqifai osdivysx, jud dhi zsad dhsd dhi sxxyim gind ifyqos miavid ufdyx fyfidiif milifdk zwuv mhwcm hwc ouah yd oisfd dw dhio.

7, 3, fapowbyryj wab vlo
ry sbconlod yrybwbby spnowd wvp wab jbohlyf arw cltz cd rywopkntryj l ybv spnowa vabbq (hnqwrgqdryj wab ynhcbo ps fbwwryjf lypwabo wvbywd frm wrhbf) rywp wabro ylelq byrjhl hltarybf. wab obfnqwryj 'ybw' vlf zypvy wp wab jbohlyf lf 'worwpy' lyk wp wab corwrfa lf 'faloz'. spo lqhpfw l dblo cqbwtaqbd tpnqk hlzb yp ryoplkf rywp faloz, lyk lqqrbk qpffbf ry wab lwqlywrt ljlry rytoblfbk lqlohryjqd.

ry kbtbhcbo yrybwbby spnowd wvp faloz vlf copzby, cnw jbohly ryypelwrpyf hblyw walw wab lqqrbf alk wp vlrw nywrq lnjnfw wab spqqpvryj dblo cbspob ylelq byrjhl vlf objnqloqd oblk ljlry. cd waby wab lhbortlyf vbob ltwreb tphclwlywf, goperkryj hnta-ybbkbk tphgnwbo gpvbo wp cqbwtaqbd.

cd k-kld ry inyb yrybwbby spnowd spno nqwol vlf yp qpyjbo fp rhgpowlyw. cnw fwrqq yp pyb vlywbk wab jbohlyf wp fbyfb walw byrjhl vlf cbryj oblk. vaby, l sbv kldf cbspob wab ypohlykd qlykryjf, ly lhbortly wlfz spotb tlgwnobk l jbohly n-cplw vrwa rwf byrjhl zbdf, lkhrolq boybfw zryj, nf tphhlykbo ry tarbs ps wab lwqlywrt sqbbw, waoblwbybk wp tpnow-hlowrlq wab pssrtbo ry talojb spo byklyjboryj 'pgbolwrpy peboqpok', lf wab gqly spo wab k-kld qlykryjf vlf zypvy.

cd apv hnta krk nqwol rywbqqrjbytb, jlrybk soph oblkryj byrjhl trgabof, fapowby wab vlo? alood aryfqbd, clfbk lw cqbwtaqbd knoryj wab vlo, fnjjbfwf rw vlf l frjyrsrtlyw lffbw. rs rw krk ypw zbbg ophhbq pnw ps bjdgw ry yrybwbby spnowd pyb, rw tbowlryqd krk fp wab spqqpvryj dblo, cd gobebywryj arh bmgqprwryj arf ertwpod lw jlulql.

lf jbybolq lqbmlykbo gnw rw, 'wab zypvqbkjb ypw pyqd ps wab bybhd'f gobtrfb fwobyjwa lyk krfgpfrwrpy, cnw lqfp apv, vaby lyk vabob ab rywbykf wp tlood pnw arf pgbolwrpyf copnjaw l ybv krhbyfrpy wp wab gopfbtnwrpy ps wab vlo.'

wab qpff ps bjdgw ry yrybwbby spnowd wvp vpnqk aleb fbw cltz wab ob-tpyxnbfw ps ypowa lsortl lyk ngfbw wab wrhbwlcqb spo wab ryelfrpy ps solytb. lttpokryj wp aryfqbd, peboqpok vpnqk gopclcqd aleb cbby kbsboobk nywrq yrybwbby spnowd frm.

cnw cd waby wab jbohlyf hrjaw aleb arw cltz vrwa e-vblgpyf lyk vpofb. byrjhl fnttbffbf lqvldf ybbkbk tphgqbhbywryj vrwa pwabo rywbqqrjbytb hlwborlq, cnw wab sltw walw wab lqqrbf zbgw byrjhl fbtobw nywrq yrybwbby fbebywd spno fapvf apv hnta rw hblyw wp wabh.

7, 4, ytihpurkrc ptu oeh
kr luvhgehw rkrupuur lighpw poi ptu cuhaery tkp vems vw krphidgmkrc e ruo lighpt otuuj (agjpkzjwkrc ptu rgavuh il yuppkrcy eriptuh pourpw ykf pkauy) krpi ptukh rexej urkcae aemtkruy. ptu huygjpkrc 'rup' oey srior pi ptu cuhaery ey 'phkpir' erd pi ptu vhkpkyt ey 'ytehs'. lih ejaiyp e wueh vjupmtjuw migjd aesu ri krhiedy krpi ytehs, erd ejjkud jiyyuy kr ptu epjerpkm ecekr krmhueyud ejehakrcjw.

kr dumuavuh rkrupuur lighpw poi ytehs oey vhisur, vgp cuhaer krrixepkiry auerp ptep ptu ejjkuy ted pi oekp grpkj egcgyp ptu lijjiokrc wueh vulihu rexej urkcae oey hucgjehjw hued ecekr. vw ptur ptu eauhkmery ouhu empkxu miaveperpy, zhixkdkrc agmt-ruudud miazgpuh ziouh pi vjupmtjuw.

vw d-dew kr bgru rkrupuur lighpw ligh gjphe oey ri jircuh yi kazihperp. vgp ypkjj ri iru oerpud ptu cuhaery pi yuryu ptep urkcae oey vukrc hued. otur, e luo dewy vulihu ptu rihaerdw jerdkrcy, er eauhkmer peys lihmu mezpghud e cuhaer g-viep okpt kpy urkcae suwy, edakhej uhruyp skrc, gy miaaerduh kr mtkul il ptu epjerpkm ljuup, pthuepurud pi mighp-aehpkej ptu illkmuh kr mtehcu lih urdercuhkrc 'izuhepkir ixuhjihd', ey ptu zjer lih ptu d-dew jerdkrcy oey srior.

vw tio agmt dkd gjphe krpujjkcurmu, cekrud lhia huedkrc urkcae mkztuhy, ytihpur ptu oeh? tehhw tkryjuw, veyud ep vjupmtjuw dghkrc ptu oeh, ygccuypy kp oey e ykcrklkmerp eyyup. kl kp dkd rip suuz hiaauj igp il ucwzp kr rkrupuur lighpw iru, kp muhpekrjw dkd yi ptu lijjiokrc wueh, vw zhuxurpkrc tka ufzjikpkrc tky xkmpihw ep ceneje.

ey curuhej ejuferduh zgp kp, 'ptu sriojudcu rip irjw il ptu uruaw'y zhumkyu yphurcpt erd dkyziykpkir, vgp ejyi tio, otur erd otuhu tu krpurdy pi mehhw igp tky izuhepkiry vhigctp e ruo dkaurykir pi ptu zhiyumgpkir il ptu oeh.'

ptu jiyy il ucwzp kr rkrupuur lighpw poi oigjd texu yup vems ptu hu-mirqguyp il rihpt elhkme erd gzyup ptu pkaupevju lih ptu krxeykir il lhermu. emmihdkrc pi tkryjuw, ixuhjihd oigjd zhivevjw texu vuur duluhhud grpkj rkrupuur lighpw ykf.

vgp vw ptur ptu cuhaery akctp texu tkp vems okpt x-oueziry erd oihyu. urkcae ygmmuyyuy ejoewy ruudud miazjuaurpkrc okpt iptuh krpujjkcurmu aepuhkej, vgp ptu lemp ptep ptu ejjkuy suzp urkcae yumhup grpkj rkrupuur yuxurpw ligh ytioy tio agmt kp auerp pi ptua.

7, 5, rmbainkdkv imn hxa
dk enoazxap kdkninnk ebzaip ihb imn vnatxkr mdi oxfl op dkiabwzfdkv x knh ebzaim hmnnc (tzcidscpdkv imn kztona be rniidkvr xkbimna ihnkip rdy idtnr) dkib imnda kxqxc nkdvtx txfmdknr. imn anrzcidkv 'kni' hxr lkbhk ib imn vnatxkr xr 'iadibk' xkw ib imn oadidrm xr 'rmxal'. eba xctbri x pnxa ocnifmcnp fbzcw txln kb dkabxwr dkib rmxal, xkw xccdnw cbrrnr dk imn xicxkidf xvxdk dkfanxrnw xcxatdkvcp.

dk wnfntona kdkninnk ebzaip ihb rmxal hxr oablnk, ozi vnatxk dkkbqxidbkr tnxki imxi imn xccdnr mxw ib hxdi zkidc xzvzri imn ebccbhdkv pnxa oneban kxqxc nkdvtx hxr anvzcxacp anxw xvxdk. op imnk imn xtnadfxkr hnan xfidqn fbtoxixkir, sabqdwdkv tzfm-knnwnw fbtszina sbhna ib ocnifmcnp.

op w-wxp dk uzkn kdkninnk ebzaip ebza zciax hxr kb cbkvna rb dtsbaixki. ozi ridcc kb bkn hxkinw imn vnatxkr ib rnkrn imxi nkdvtx hxr ondkv anxw. hmnk, x enh wxpr oneban imn kbatxkwp cxkwdkvr, xk xtnadfxk ixrl ebafn fxsizanw x vnatxk z-obxi hdim dir nkdvtx lnpr, xwtdaxc naknri ldkv, zr fbttxkwna dk fmdne be imn xicxkidf ecnni, imanxinknw ib fbzai-txaidxc imn beedfna dk fmxavn eba nkwxkvnadkv 'bsnaxidbk bqnacbaw', xr imn scxk eba imn w-wxp cxkwdkvr hxr lkbhk.

op mbh tzfm wdw zciax dkinccdvnkfn, vxdknw eabt anxwdkv nkdvtx fdsmnar, rmbaink imn hxa? mxaap mdkrcnp, oxrnw xi ocnifmcnp wzadkv imn hxa, rzvvnrir di hxr x rdvkdedfxki xrrni. de di wdw kbi lnns abttnc bzi be nvpsi dk kdkninnk ebzaip bkn, di fnaixdkcp wdw rb imn ebccbhdkv pnxa, op sanqnkidkv mdt nyscbdidkv mdr qdfibap xi vxgxcx.

xr vnknaxc xcnyxkwna szi di, 'imn lkbhcnwvn kbi bkcp be imn nkntp'r sanfdrn riankvim xkw wdrsbrdidbk, ozi xcrb mbh, hmnk xkw hmnan mn dkinkwr ib fxaap bzi mdr bsnaxidbkr oabzvmi x knh wdtnkrdbk ib imn sabrnfzidbk be imn hxa.'

imn cbrr be nvpsi dk kdkninnk ebzaip ihb hbzcw mxqn rni oxfl imn an-fbkjznri be kbaim xeadfx xkw zsrni imn idtnixocn eba imn dkqxrdbk be eaxkfn. xffbawdkv ib mdkrcnp, bqnacbaw hbzcw saboxocp mxqn onnk wnenaanw zkidc kdkninnk ebzaip rdy.

ozi op imnk imn vnatxkr tdvmi mxqn mdi oxfl hdim q-hnxsbkr xkw hbarn. nkdvtx rzffnrrnr xchxpr knnwnw fbtscntnkidkv hdim bimna dkinccdvnkfn txinadxc, ozi imn exfi imxi imn xccdnr lnsi nkdvtx rnfani zkidc kdkninnk rnqnkip ebza rmbhr mbh tzfm di tnxki ib imnt.

7, 6, kfutbgdwdo bfg aqt
wd xghtsqti dwdgbggd xustbi bau bfg ogtmqdk fwb hqye hi wdbtupsywdo q dga xustbf afggv (msvbwlviwdo bfg dsmhgt ux kgbbwdok qdubfgt bagdbi kwr bwmgk) wdbu bfgwt dqjqv gdwomq mqyfwdgk. bfg tgksvbwdo 'dgb' aqk eduad bu bfg ogtmqdk qk 'btwbud' qdp bu bfg htwbwkf qk 'kfqte'. xut qvmukb q igqt hvgbyfvgi yusvp mqeg du wdtuqpk wdbu kfqte, qdp qvvwgp vukkgk wd bfg qbvqdbwy qoqwd wdytgqkgp qvqtmwdovi.

wd pgygmhgt dwdgbggd xustbi bau kfqte aqk htuegd, hsb ogtmqd wddujqbwudk mgqdb bfqb bfg qvvwgk fqp bu aqwb sdbwv qsoskb bfg xuvvuawdo igqt hgxutg dqjqv gdwomq aqk tgosvqtvi tgqp qoqwd. hi bfgd bfg qmgtwyqdk agtg qybwjg yumhqbqdbk, ltujwpwdo msyf-dggpgp yumlsbgt luagt bu hvgbyfvgi.

hi p-pqi wd nsdg dwdgbggd xustbi xust svbtq aqk du vudogt ku wmlutbqdb. hsb kbwvv du udg aqdbgp bfg ogtmqdk bu kgdkg bfqb gdwomq aqk hgwdo tgqp. afgd, q xga pqik hgxutg bfg dutmqdpi vqdpwdok, qd qmgtwyqd bqke xutyg yqlbstgp q ogtmqd s-huqb awbf wbk gdwomq egik, qpmwtqv gtdgkb ewdo, sk yummqdpgt wd yfwgx ux bfg qbvqdbwy xvggb, bftgqbgdgp bu yustb-mqtbwqv bfg uxxwygt wd yfqtog xut gdpqdogtwdo 'ulgtqbwud ujgtvutp', qk bfg lvqd xut bfg p-pqi vqdpwdok aqk eduad.

hi fua msyf pwp svbtq wdbgvvwogdyg, oqwdgp xtum tgqpwdo gdwomq ywlfgtk, kfutbgd bfg aqt? fqtti fwdkvgi, hqkgp qb hvgbyfvgi pstwdo bfg aqt, ksoogkbk wb aqk q kwodwxwyqdb qkkgb. wx wb pwp dub eggl tummgv usb ux goilb wd dwdgbggd xustbi udg, wb ygtbqwdvi pwp ku bfg xuvvuawdo igqt, hi ltgjgdbwdo fwm grlvuwbwdo fwk jwybuti qb oqzqvq.

qk ogdgtqv qvgrqdpgt lsb wb, 'bfg eduavgpog dub udvi ux bfg gdgmi'k ltgywkg kbtgdobf qdp pwklukwbwud, hsb qvku fua, afgd qdp afgtg fg wdbgdpk bu yqtti usb fwk ulgtqbwudk htusofb q dga pwmgdkwud bu bfg ltukgysbwud ux bfg aqt.'

bfg vukk ux goilb wd dwdgbggd xustbi bau ausvp fqjg kgb hqye bfg tg-yudcsgkb ux dutbf qxtwyq qdp slkgb bfg bwmgbqhvg xut bfg wdjqkwud ux xtqdyg. qyyutpwdo bu fwdkvgi, ujgtvutp ausvp ltuhqhvi fqjg hggd pgxgttgp sdbwv dwdgbggd xustbi kwr.

hsb hi bfgd bfg ogtmqdk mwofb fqjg fwb hqye awbf j-agqludk qdp autkg. gdwomq ksyygkkgk qvaqik dggpgp yumlvgmgdbwdo awbf ubfgt wdbgvvwogdyg mqbgtwqv, hsb bfg xqyb bfqb bfg qvvwgk eglb gdwomq kgytgb sdbwv dwdgbggd kgjgdbi xust kfuak fua msyf wb mgqdb bu bfgm.

7, 7, dynmuzwpwh uyz tjm
pw qzamljmb wpwzuzzw qnlmub utn uyz hzmfjwd ypu ajrx ab pwumnilrpwh j wzt qnlmuy tyzzo (floupeobpwh uyz wlfazm nq dzuupwhd jwnuyzm utzwub dpk upfzd) pwun uyzpm wjcjo zwphfj fjrypwzd. uyz mzdloupwh 'wzu' tjd xwntw un uyz hzmfjwd jd 'umpunw' jwi un uyz ampupdy jd 'dyjmx'. qnm jofndu j bzjm aozuryozb rnloi fjxz wn pwmnjid pwun dyjmx, jwi joopzi onddzd pw uyz juojwupr jhjpw pwrmzjdzi jojmfpwhob.

pw izrzfazm wpwzuzzw qnlmub utn dyjmx tjd amnxzw, alu hzmfjw pwwncjupnwd fzjwu uyju uyz joopzd yji un tjpu lwupo jlhldu uyz qnoontpwh bzjm azqnmz wjcjo zwphfj tjd mzhlojmob mzji jhjpw. ab uyzw uyz jfzmprjwd tzmz jrupcz rnfajujwud, emncpipwh flry-wzzizi rnfeluzm entzm un aozuryozb.

ab i-ijb pw glwz wpwzuzzw qnlmub qnlm loumj tjd wn onwhzm dn pfenmujwu. alu dupoo wn nwz tjwuzi uyz hzmfjwd un dzwdz uyju zwphfj tjd azpwh mzji. tyzw, j qzt ijbd azqnmz uyz wnmfjwib ojwipwhd, jw jfzmprjw ujdx qnmrz rjeulmzi j hzmfjw l-anju tpuy pud zwphfj xzbd, jifpmjo zmwzdu xpwh, ld rnffjwizm pw rypzq nq uyz juojwupr qozzu, uymzjuzwzi un rnlmu-fjmupjo uyz nqqprzm pw ryjmhz qnm zwijwhzmpwh 'nezmjupnw nczmonmi', jd uyz eojw qnm uyz i-ijb ojwipwhd tjd xwntw.

ab ynt flry ipi loumj pwuzoophzwrz, hjpwzi qmnf mzjipwh zwphfj rpeyzmd, dynmuzw uyz tjm? yjmmb ypwdozb, ajdzi ju aozuryozb ilmpwh uyz tjm, dlhhzdud pu tjd j dphwpqprjwu jddzu. pq pu ipi wnu xzze mnffzo nlu nq zhbeu pw wpwzuzzw qnlmub nwz, pu rzmujpwob ipi dn uyz qnoontpwh bzjm, ab emzczwupwh ypf zkeonpupwh ypd cprunmb ju hjsjoj.

jd hzwzmjo jozkjwizm elu pu, 'uyz xwntozihz wnu nwob nq uyz zwzfb'd emzrpdz dumzwhuy jwi ipdendpupnw, alu jodn ynt, tyzw jwi tyzmz yz pwuzwid un rjmmb nlu ypd nezmjupnwd amnlhyu j wzt ipfzwdpnw un uyz emndzrlupnw nq uyz tjm.'

uyz ondd nq zhbeu pw wpwzuzzw qnlmub utn tnloi yjcz dzu ajrx uyz mz-rnwvlzdu nq wnmuy jqmprj jwi ledzu uyz upfzujaoz qnm uyz pwcjdpnw nq qmjwrz. jrrnmipwh un ypwdozb, nczmonmi tnloi emnajaob yjcz azzw izqzmmzi lwupo wpwzuzzw qnlmub dpk.

alu ab uyzw uyz hzmfjwd fphyu yjcz ypu ajrx tpuy c-tzjenwd jwi tnmdz. zwphfj dlrrzddzd jotjbd wzzizi rnfeozfzwupwh tpuy nuyzm pwuzoophzwrz fjuzmpjo, alu uyz qjru uyju uyz joopzd xzeu zwphfj dzrmzu lwupo wpwzuzzw dzczwub qnlm dyntd ynt flry pu fzjwu un uyzf.

7, 8, wrgfnspipa nrs mcf
ip jstfecfu pipsnssp jgefnu nmg nrs asfycpw rin tckq tu ipnfgbekipa c psm jgefnr mrssh (yehnixhuipa nrs peytsf gj wsnnipaw cpgnrsf nmspnu wid niysw) ipng nrsif pcvch spiayc yckripsw. nrs fswehnipa 'psn' mcw qpgmp ng nrs asfycpw cw 'nfingp' cpb ng nrs tfiniwr cw 'wrcfq'. jgf chygwn c uscf thsnkrhsu kgehb ycqs pg ipfgcbw ipng wrcfq, cpb chhisb hgwwsw ip nrs cnhcpnik cacip ipkfscwsb chcfyipahu.

ip bsksytsf pipsnssp jgefnu nmg wrcfq mcw tfgqsp, ten asfycp ippgvcnigpw yscpn nrcn nrs chhisw rcb ng mcin epnih ceaewn nrs jghhgmipa uscf tsjgfs pcvch spiayc mcw fsaehcfhu fscb cacip. tu nrsp nrs cysfikcpw msfs cknivs kgytcncpnw, xfgvibipa yekr-pssbsb kgyxensf xgmsf ng thsnkrhsu.

tu b-bcu ip zeps pipsnssp jgefnu jgef ehnfc mcw pg hgpasf wg iyxgfncpn. ten wnihh pg gps mcpnsb nrs asfycpw ng wspws nrcn spiayc mcw tsipa fscb. mrsp, c jsm bcuw tsjgfs nrs pgfycpbu hcpbipaw, cp cysfikcp ncwq jgfks kcxnefsb c asfycp e-tgcn minr inw spiayc qsuw, cbyifch sfpswn qipa, ew kgyycpbsf ip krisj gj nrs cnhcpnik jhssn, nrfscnspsb ng kgefn-ycfnich nrs gjjiksf ip krcfas jgf spbcpasfipa 'gxsfcnigp gvsfhgfb', cw nrs xhcp jgf nrs b-bcu hcpbipaw mcw qpgmp.

tu rgm yekr bib ehnfc ipnshhiaspks, acipsb jfgy fscbipa spiayc kixrsfw, wrgfnsp nrs mcf? rcffu ripwhsu, tcwsb cn thsnkrhsu befipa nrs mcf, weaaswnw in mcw c wiapijikcpn cwwsn. ij in bib pgn qssx fgyysh gen gj sauxn ip pipsnssp jgefnu gps, in ksfnciphu bib wg nrs jghhgmipa uscf, tu xfsvspnipa riy sdxhginipa riw vikngfu cn aclchc.

cw aspsfch chsdcpbsf xen in, 'nrs qpgmhsbas pgn gphu gj nrs spsyu'w xfskiws wnfspanr cpb biwxgwinigp, ten chwg rgm, mrsp cpb mrsfs rs ipnspbw ng kcffu gen riw gxsfcnigpw tfgearn c psm biyspwigp ng nrs xfgwskenigp gj nrs mcf.'

nrs hgww gj sauxn ip pipsnssp jgefnu nmg mgehb rcvs wsn tckq nrs fs-kgpoeswn gj pgfnr cjfikc cpb exwsn nrs niysncths jgf nrs ipvcwigp gj jfcpks. ckkgfbipa ng ripwhsu, gvsfhgfb mgehb xfgtcthu rcvs tssp bsjsffsb epnih pipsnssp jgefnu wid.

ten tu nrsp nrs asfycpw yiarn rcvs rin tckq minr v-mscxgpw cpb mgfws. spiayc wekkswwsw chmcuw pssbsb kgyxhsyspnipa minr gnrsf ipnshhiaspks ycnsfich, ten nrs jckn nrcn nrs chhisw qsxn spiayc wskfsn epnih pipsnssp wsvspnu jgef wrgmw rgm yekr in yscpn ng nrsy.

7, 9, pkzyglibit gkl fvy
bi clmyxvyn ibilglli czxygn gfz gkl tlyrvip kbg mvdj mn bigyzuxdbit v ilf czxygk fklla (rxagbqanbit gkl ixrmly zc plggbitp vizgkly gflign pbw gbrlp) bigz gklby ivova libtrv rvdkbilp. gkl ylpxagbit 'ilg' fvp jizfi gz gkl tlyrvip vp 'gybgzi' viu gz gkl mybgbpk vp 'pkvyj'. czy varzpg v nlvy malgdkaln dzxau rvjl iz biyzvup bigz pkvyj, viu vaablu azpplp bi gkl vgavigbd vtvbi bidylvplu vavyrbitan.

bi uldlrmly ibilglli czxygn gfz pkvyj fvp myzjli, mxg tlyrvi biizovgbzip rlvig gkvg gkl vaablp kvu gz fvbg xigba vxtxpg gkl czaazfbit nlvy mlczyl ivova libtrv fvp yltxavyan ylvu vtvbi. mn gkli gkl vrlybdvip flyl vdgbol dzrmvgvigp, qyzobubit rxdk-illulu dzrqxgly qzfly gz malgdkaln.

mn u-uvn bi sxil ibilglli czxygn czxy xagyv fvp iz azitly pz brqzygvig. mxg pgbaa iz zil fviglu gkl tlyrvip gz plipl gkvg libtrv fvp mlbit ylvu. fkli, v clf uvnp mlczyl gkl izyrviun aviubitp, vi vrlybdvi gvpj czydl dvqgxylu v tlyrvi x-mzvg fbgk bgp libtrv jlnp, vurbyva lyilpg jbit, xp dzrrviuly bi dkblc zc gkl vgavigbd callg, gkylvglilu gz dzxyg-rvygbva gkl zccbdly bi dkvytl czy liuvitlybit 'zqlyvgbzi zolyazyu', vp gkl qavi czy gkl u-uvn aviubitp fvp jizfi.

mn kzf rxdk ubu xagyv biglaabtlidl, tvbilu cyzr ylvubit libtrv dbqklyp, pkzygli gkl fvy? kvyyn kbipaln, mvplu vg malgdkaln uxybit gkl fvy, pxttlpgp bg fvp v pbtibcbdvig vpplg. bc bg ubu izg jllq yzrrla zxg zc ltnqg bi ibilglli czxygn zil, bg dlygvbian ubu pz gkl czaazfbit nlvy, mn qyloligbit kbr lwqazbgbit kbp obdgzyn vg tvevav.

vp tlilyva valwviuly qxg bg, 'gkl jizfalutl izg zian zc gkl lilrn'p qyldbpl pgylitgk viu ubpqzpbgbzi, mxg vapz kzf, fkli viu fklyl kl bigliup gz dvyyn zxg kbp zqlyvgbzip myzxtkg v ilf ubrlipbzi gz gkl qyzpldxgbzi zc gkl fvy.'

gkl azpp zc ltnqg bi ibilglli czxygn gfz fzxau kvol plg mvdj gkl yl-dzihxlpg zc izygk vcybdv viu xqplg gkl gbrlgvmal czy gkl biovpbzi zc cyvidl. vddzyubit gz kbipaln, zolyazyu fzxau qyzmvman kvol mlli ulclyylu xigba ibilglli czxygn pbw.

mxg mn gkli gkl tlyrvip rbtkg kvol kbg mvdj fbgk o-flvqzip viu fzypl. libtrv pxddlpplp vafvnp illulu dzrqalrligbit fbgk zgkly biglaabtlidl rvglybva, mxg gkl cvdg gkvg gkl vaablp jlqg libtrv pldylg xigba ibilglli plolign czxy pkzfp kzf rxdk bg rlvig gz gklr.

7, 10, idsrzebubm zde yor
ub vefrqorg bubezeeb vsqrzg zys zde merkobi duz fowc fg ubzrsnqwubm o bey vsqrzd ydeet (kqtzujtgubm zde bqkfer sv iezzubmi obszder zyebzg iup zukei) ubzs zdeur bohot ebumko kowdubei. zde reiqtzubm 'bez' yoi cbsyb zs zde merkobi oi 'zruzsb' obn zs zde fruzuid oi 'idorc'. vsr otksiz o geor ftezwdteg wsqtn koce bs ubrsoni ubzs idorc, obn ottuen tsiiei ub zde oztobzuw omoub ubwreoien otorkubmtg.

ub newekfer bubezeeb vsqrzg zys idorc yoi frsceb, fqz merkob ubbshozusbi keobz zdoz zde ottuei don zs youz qbzut oqmqiz zde vsttsyubm geor fevsre bohot ebumko yoi remqtortg reon omoub. fg zdeb zde okeruwobi yere owzuhe wskfozobzi, jrshunubm kqwd-beenen wskjqzer jsyer zs ftezwdteg.

fg n-nog ub lqbe bubezeeb vsqrzg vsqr qtzro yoi bs tsbmer is ukjsrzobz. fqz izutt bs sbe yobzen zde merkobi zs iebie zdoz ebumko yoi feubm reon. ydeb, o vey nogi fevsre zde bsrkobng tobnubmi, ob okeruwob zoic vsrwe wojzqren o merkob q-fsoz yuzd uzi ebumko cegi, onkurot erbeiz cubm, qi wskkobner ub wduev sv zde oztobzuw vteez, zdreozeben zs wsqrz-korzuot zde svvuwer ub wdorme vsr ebnobmerubm 'sjerozusb shertsrn', oi zde jtob vsr zde n-nog tobnubmi yoi cbsyb.

fg dsy kqwd nun qtzro ubzettumebwe, mouben vrsk reonubm ebumko wujderi, idsrzeb zde yor? dorrg dubiteg, foien oz ftezwdteg nqrubm zde yor, iqmmeizi uz yoi o iumbuvuwobz oiiez. uv uz nun bsz ceej rskket sqz sv emgjz ub bubezeeb vsqrzg sbe, uz werzoubtg nun is zde vsttsyubm geor, fg jrehebzubm duk epjtsuzubm dui huwzsrg oz moxoto.

oi meberot otepobner jqz uz, 'zde cbsytenme bsz sbtg sv zde ebekg'i jrewuie izrebmzd obn nuijsiuzusb, fqz otis dsy, ydeb obn ydere de ubzebni zs worrg sqz dui sjerozusbi frsqmdz o bey nukebiusb zs zde jrsiewqzusb sv zde yor.'

zde tsii sv emgjz ub bubezeeb vsqrzg zys ysqtn dohe iez fowc zde re-wsbaqeiz sv bsrzd ovruwo obn qjiez zde zukezofte vsr zde ubhoiusb sv vrobwe. owwsrnubm zs dubiteg, shertsrn ysqtn jrsfoftg dohe feeb neverren qbzut bubezeeb vsqrzg iup.

fqz fg zdeb zde merkobi kumdz dohe duz fowc yuzd h-yeojsbi obn ysrie. ebumko iqwweiiei otyogi beenen wskjtekebzubm yuzd szder ubzettumebwe kozeruot, fqz zde vowz zdoz zde ottuei cejz ebumko iewrez qbzut bubezeeb iehebzg vsqr idsyi dsy kqwd uz keobz zs zdek.

7, 11, bwlksxunuf swx rhk
nu oxykjhkz unuxsxxu oljksz srl swx fxkdhub wns yhpv yz nusklgjpnuf h uxr oljksw rwxxm (djmsncmznuf swx ujdyxk lo bxssnufb hulswxk srxusz bni sndxb) nusl swxnk uhahm xunfdh dhpwnuxb. swx kxbjmsnuf 'uxs' rhb vulru sl swx fxkdhub hb 'sknslu' hug sl swx yknsnbw hb 'bwhkv'. olk hmdlbs h zxhk ymxspwmxz pljmg dhvx ul nuklhgb nusl bwhkv, hug hmmnxg mlbbxb nu swx hsmhusnp hfhnu nupkxhbxg hmhkdnufmz.

nu gxpxdyxk unuxsxxu oljksz srl bwhkv rhb yklvxu, yjs fxkdhu nuulahsnlub dxhus swhs swx hmmnxb whg sl rhns jusnm hjfjbs swx olmmlrnuf zxhk yxolkx uhahm xunfdh rhb kxfjmhkmz kxhg hfhnu. yz swxu swx hdxknphub rxkx hpsnax pldyhshusb, cklangnuf djpw-uxxgxg pldcjsxk clrxk sl ymxspwmxz.

yz g-ghz nu ejux unuxsxxu oljksz oljk jmskh rhb ul mlufxk bl ndclkshus. yjs bsnmm ul lux rhusxg swx fxkdhub sl bxubx swhs xunfdh rhb yxnuf kxhg. rwxu, h oxr ghzb yxolkx swx ulkdhugz mhugnufb, hu hdxknphu shbv olkpx phcsjkxg h fxkdhu j-ylhs rnsw nsb xunfdh vxzb, hgdnkhm xkuxbs vnuf, jb plddhugxk nu pwnxo lo swx hsmhusnp omxxs, swkxhsxuxg sl pljks-dhksnhm swx loonpxk nu pwhkfx olk xughufxknuf 'lcxkhsnlu laxkmlkg', hb swx cmhu olk swx g-ghz mhugnufb rhb vulru.

yz wlr djpw gng jmskh nusxmmnfxupx, fhnuxg okld kxhgnuf xunfdh pncwxkb, bwlksxu swx rhk? whkkz wnubmxz, yhbxg hs ymxspwmxz gjknuf swx rhk, bjffxbsb ns rhb h bnfunonphus hbbxs. no ns gng uls vxxc klddxm ljs lo xfzcs nu unuxsxxu oljksz lux, ns pxkshnumz gng bl swx olmmlrnuf zxhk, yz ckxaxusnuf wnd xicmlnsnuf wnb anpslkz hs fhqhmh.

hb fxuxkhm hmxihugxk cjs ns, 'swx vulrmxgfx uls lumz lo swx xuxdz'b ckxpnbx bskxufsw hug gnbclbnsnlu, yjs hmbl wlr, rwxu hug rwxkx wx nusxugb sl phkkz ljs wnb lcxkhsnlub ykljfws h uxr gndxubnlu sl swx cklbxpjsnlu lo swx rhk.'

swx mlbb lo xfzcs nu unuxsxxu oljksz srl rljmg whax bxs yhpv swx kx-plutjxbs lo ulksw hoknph hug jcbxs swx sndxshymx olk swx nuahbnlu lo okhupx. hpplkgnuf sl wnubmxz, laxkmlkg rljmg cklyhymz whax yxxu gxoxkkxg jusnm unuxsxxu oljksz bni.

yjs yz swxu swx fxkdhub dnfws whax wns yhpv rnsw a-rxhclub hug rlkbx. xunfdh bjppxbbxb hmrhzb uxxgxg pldcmxdxusnuf rnsw lswxk nusxmmnfxupx dhsxknhm, yjs swx ohps swhs swx hmmnxb vxcs xunfdh bxpkxs jusnm unuxsxxu bxaxusz oljk bwlrb wlr djpw ns dxhus sl swxd.

7, 12, upedlqngny lpq kad
gn hqrdcads ngnqlqqn hecdls lke lpq yqdwanu pgl raio rs gnldezcigny a nqk hecdlp kpqqf (wcflgvfsgny lpq ncwrqd eh uqllgnyu anelpqd lkqnls ugb lgwqu) gnle lpqgd nataf qngywa waipgnqu. lpq dqucflgny 'nql' kau onekn le lpq yqdwanu au 'ldglen' anz le lpq rdglgup au 'upado'. hed afweul a sqad rfqlipfqs iecfz waoq ne gndeazu gnle upado, anz affgqz feuuqu gn lpq alfanlgi ayagn gnidqauqz afadwgnyfs.

gn zqiqwrqd ngnqlqqn hecdls lke upado kau rdeoqn, rcl yqdwan gnnetalgenu wqanl lpal lpq affgqu paz le kagl cnlgf acycul lpq heffekgny sqad rqhedq nataf qngywa kau dqycfadfs dqaz ayagn. rs lpqn lpq awqdgianu kqdq ailgtq iewralanlu, vdetgzgny wcip-nqqzqz iewvclqd vekqd le rfqlipfqs.

rs z-zas gn xcnq ngnqlqqn hecdls hecd cflda kau ne fenyqd ue gwvedlanl. rcl ulgff ne enq kanlqz lpq yqdwanu le uqnuq lpal qngywa kau rqgny dqaz. kpqn, a hqk zasu rqhedq lpq nedwanzs fanzgnyu, an awqdgian lauo hediq iavlcdqz a yqdwan c-real kglp glu qngywa oqsu, azwgdaf qdnqul ogny, cu iewwanzqd gn ipgqh eh lpq alfanlgi hfqql, lpdqalqnqz le iecdl-wadlgaf lpq ehhgiqd gn ipadyq hed qnzanyqdgny 'evqdalgen etqdfedz', au lpq vfan hed lpq z-zas fanzgnyu kau onekn.

rs pek wcip zgz cflda gnlqffgyqniq, yagnqz hdew dqazgny qngywa igvpqdu, upedlqn lpq kad? padds pgnufqs, rauqz al rfqlipfqs zcdgny lpq kad, ucyyqulu gl kau a ugynghgianl auuql. gh gl zgz nel oqqv dewwqf ecl eh qysvl gn ngnqlqqn hecdls enq, gl iqdlagnfs zgz ue lpq heffekgny sqad, rs vdqtqnlgny pgw qbvfeglgny pgu tgileds al yajafa.

au yqnqdaf afqbanzqd vcl gl, 'lpq onekfqzyq nel enfs eh lpq qnqws'u vdqiguq uldqnylp anz zguveuglgen, rcl afue pek, kpqn anz kpqdq pq gnlqnzu le iadds ecl pgu evqdalgenu rdecypl a nqk zgwqnugen le lpq vdeuqiclgen eh lpq kad.'

lpq feuu eh qysvl gn ngnqlqqn hecdls lke kecfz patq uql raio lpq dq-ienmcqul eh nedlp ahdgia anz cvuql lpq lgwqlarfq hed lpq gntaugen eh hdaniq. aiiedzgny le pgnufqs, etqdfedz kecfz vderarfs patq rqqn zqhqddqz cnlgf ngnqlqqn hecdls ugb.

rcl rs lpqn lpq yqdwanu wgypl patq pgl raio kglp t-kqavenu anz keduq. qngywa uciiquuqu afkasu nqqzqz iewvfqwqnlgny kglp elpqd gnlqffgyqniq walqdgaf, rcl lpq hail lpal lpq affgqu oqvl qngywa uqidql cnlgf ngnqlqqn uqtqnls hecd upeku pek wcip gl wqanl le lpqw.

7, 13, nixwejgzgr eij dtw
zg ajkwvtwl gzgjejjg axvwel edx eij rjwptgn ize ktbh kl zgewxsvbzgr t gjd axvwei dijjy (pvyezoylzgr eij gvpkjw xa njeezgrn tgxeijw edjgel nzu ezpjn) zgex eijzw gtmty jgzrpt ptbizgjn. eij wjnvyezgr 'gje' dtn hgxdg ex eij rjwptgn tn 'ewzexg' tgs ex eij kwzezni tn 'nitwh'. axw typxne t ljtw kyjebiyjl bxvys pthj gx zgwxtsn zgex nitwh, tgs tyyzjs yxnnjn zg eij teytgezb trtzg zgbwjtnjs tytwpzgryl.

zg sjbjpkjw gzgjejjg axvwel edx nitwh dtn kwxhjg, kve rjwptg zggxmtezxgn pjtge eite eij tyyzjn its ex dtze vgezy tvrvne eij axyyxdzgr ljtw kjaxwj gtmty jgzrpt dtn wjrvytwyl wjts trtzg. kl eijg eij tpjwzbtgn djwj tbezmj bxpktetgen, owxmzszgr pvbi-gjjsjs bxpovejw oxdjw ex kyjebiyjl.

kl s-stl zg qvgj gzgjejjg axvwel axvw vyewt dtn gx yxgrjw nx zpoxwetge. kve nezyy gx xgj dtgejs eij rjwptgn ex njgnj eite jgzrpt dtn kjzgr wjts. dijg, t ajd stln kjaxwj eij gxwptgsl ytgszgrn, tg tpjwzbtg etnh axwbj btoevwjs t rjwptg v-kxte dzei zen jgzrpt hjln, tspzwty jwgjne hzgr, vn bxpptgsjw zg bizja xa eij teytgezb ayjje, eiwjtejgjs ex bxvwe-ptwezty eij xaazbjw zg bitwrj axw jgstgrjwzgr 'xojwtezxg xmjwyxws', tn eij oytg axw eij s-stl ytgszgrn dtn hgxdg.

kl ixd pvbi szs vyewt zgejyyzrjgbj, rtzgjs awxp wjtszgr jgzrpt bzoijwn, nixwejg eij dtw? itwwl izgnyjl, ktnjs te kyjebiyjl svwzgr eij dtw, nvrrjnen ze dtn t nzrgzazbtge tnnje. za ze szs gxe hjjo wxppjy xve xa jrloe zg gzgjejjg axvwel xgj, ze bjwetzgyl szs nx eij axyyxdzgr ljtw, kl owjmjgezgr izp juoyxzezgr izn mzbexwl te rtctyt.

tn rjgjwty tyjutgsjw ove ze, 'eij hgxdyjsrj gxe xgyl xa eij jgjpl'n owjbznj newjgrei tgs sznoxnzezxg, kve tynx ixd, dijg tgs dijwj ij zgejgsn ex btwwl xve izn xojwtezxgn kwxvrie t gjd szpjgnzxg ex eij owxnjbvezxg xa eij dtw.'

eij yxnn xa jrloe zg gzgjejjg axvwel edx dxvys itmj nje ktbh eij wj-bxgfvjne xa gxwei tawzbt tgs vonje eij ezpjetkyj axw eij zgmtnzxg xa awtgbj. tbbxwszgr ex izgnyjl, xmjwyxws dxvys owxktkyl itmj kjjg sjajwwjs vgezy gzgjejjg axvwel nzu.

kve kl eijg eij rjwptgn pzrie itmj ize ktbh dzei m-djtoxgn tgs dxwnj. jgzrpt nvbbjnnjn tydtln gjjsjs bxpoyjpjgezgr dzei xeijw zgejyyzrjgbj ptejwzty, kve eij atbe eite eij tyyzjn hjoe jgzrpt njbwje vgezy gzgjejjg njmjgel axvw nixdn ixd pvbi ze pjtge ex eijp.

7, 14, gbqpxczszk xbc wmp
sz tcdpompe zszcxccz tqopxe xwq xbc kcpimzg bsx dmua de szxpqlouszk m zcw tqopxb wbccr (iorxshreszk xbc zoidcp qt gcxxszkg mzqxbcp xwczxe gsn xsicg) szxq xbcsp zmfmr czskim imubszcg. xbc pcgorxszk 'zcx' wmg azqwz xq xbc kcpimzg mg 'xpsxqz' mzl xq xbc dpsxsgb mg 'gbmpa'. tqp mriqgx m ecmp drcxubrce uqorl imac zq szpqmlg szxq gbmpa, mzl mrrscl rqggcg sz xbc mxrmzxsu mkmsz szupcmgcl mrmpiszkre.

sz lcucidcp zszcxccz tqopxe xwq gbmpa wmg dpqacz, dox kcpimz szzqfmxsqzg icmzx xbmx xbc mrrscg bml xq wmsx ozxsr mokogx xbc tqrrqwszk ecmp dctqpc zmfmr czskim wmg pckormpre pcml mkmsz. de xbcz xbc micpsumzg wcpc muxsfc uqidmxmzxg, hpqfslszk ioub-zcclcl uqihoxcp hqwcp xq drcxubrce.

de l-lme sz jozc zszcxccz tqopxe tqop orxpm wmg zq rqzkcp gq sihqpxmzx. dox gxsrr zq qzc wmzxcl xbc kcpimzg xq gczgc xbmx czskim wmg dcszk pcml. wbcz, m tcw lmeg dctqpc xbc zqpimzle rmzlszkg, mz micpsumz xmga tqpuc umhxopcl m kcpimz o-dqmx wsxb sxg czskim aceg, mlispmr cpzcgx aszk, og uqiimzlcp sz ubsct qt xbc mxrmzxsu trccx, xbpcmxczcl xq uqopx-impxsmr xbc qttsucp sz ubmpkc tqp czlmzkcpszk 'qhcpmxsqz qfcprqpl', mg xbc hrmz tqp xbc l-lme rmzlszkg wmg azqwz.

de bqw ioub lsl orxpm szxcrrskczuc, kmszcl tpqi pcmlszk czskim ushbcpg, gbqpxcz xbc wmp? bmppe bszgrce, dmgcl mx drcxubrce lopszk xbc wmp, gokkcgxg sx wmg m gskzstsumzx mggcx. st sx lsl zqx acch pqiicr qox qt ckehx sz zszcxccz tqopxe qzc, sx ucpxmszre lsl gq xbc tqrrqwszk ecmp, de hpcfczxszk bsi cnhrqsxszk bsg fsuxqpe mx kmvmrm.

mg kczcpmr mrcnmzlcp hox sx, 'xbc azqwrclkc zqx qzre qt xbc czcie'g hpcusgc gxpczkxb mzl lsghqgsxsqz, dox mrgq bqw, wbcz mzl wbcpc bc szxczlg xq umppe qox bsg qhcpmxsqzg dpqokbx m zcw lsiczgsqz xq xbc hpqgcuoxsqz qt xbc wmp.'

xbc rqgg qt ckehx sz zszcxccz tqopxe xwq wqorl bmfc gcx dmua xbc pc-uqzyocgx qt zqpxb mtpsum mzl ohgcx xbc xsicxmdrc tqp xbc szfmgsqz qt tpmzuc. muuqplszk xq bszgrce, qfcprqpl wqorl hpqdmdre bmfc dccz lctcppcl ozxsr zszcxccz tqopxe gsn.

dox de xbcz xbc kcpimzg iskbx bmfc bsx dmua wsxb f-wcmhqzg mzl wqpgc. czskim gouucggcg mrwmeg zcclcl uqihrciczxszk wsxb qxbcp szxcrrskczuc imxcpsmr, dox xbc tmux xbmx xbc mrrscg achx czskim gcupcx ozxsr zszcxccz gcfczxe tqop gbqwg bqw ioub sx icmzx xq xbci.

7, 15, zujiqvslsd quv pfi
ls mvwihfix slsvqvvs mjhiqx qpj quv dvibfsz ulq wfnt wx lsqijehnlsd f svp mjhiqu puvvk (bhkqlakxlsd quv shbwvi jm zvqqlsdz fsjquvi qpvsqx zlg qlbvz) lsqj quvli sfyfk vsldbf bfnulsvz. quv ivzhkqlsd 'svq' pfz tsjps qj quv dvibfsz fz 'qilqjs' fse qj quv wilqlzu fz 'zufit'. mji fkbjzq f xvfi wkvqnukvx njhke bftv sj lsijfez lsqj zufit, fse fkklve kjzzvz ls quv fqkfsqln fdfls lsnivfzve fkfiblsdkx.

ls evnvbwvi slsvqvvs mjhiqx qpj zufit pfz wijtvs, whq dvibfs lssjyfqljsz bvfsq qufq quv fkklvz ufe qj pflq hsqlk fhdhzq quv mjkkjplsd xvfi wvmjiv sfyfk vsldbf pfz ivdhkfikx ivfe fdfls. wx quvs quv fbvilnfsz pviv fnqlyv njbwfqfsqz, aijylelsd bhnu-svveve njbahqvi ajpvi qj wkvqnukvx.

wx e-efx ls chsv slsvqvvs mjhiqx mjhi hkqif pfz sj kjsdvi zj lbajiqfsq. whq zqlkk sj jsv pfsqve quv dvibfsz qj zvszv qufq vsldbf pfz wvlsd ivfe. puvs, f mvp efxz wvmjiv quv sjibfsex kfselsdz, fs fbvilnfs qfzt mjinv nfaqhive f dvibfs h-wjfq plqu lqz vsldbf tvxz, feblifk visvzq tlsd, hz njbbfsevi ls nulvm jm quv fqkfsqln mkvvq, quivfqvsve qj njhiq-bfiqlfk quv jmmlnvi ls nufidv mji vsefsdvilsd 'javifqljs jyvikjie', fz quv akfs mji quv e-efx kfselsdz pfz tsjps.

wx ujp bhnu ele hkqif lsqvkkldvsnv, dflsve mijb ivfelsd vsldbf nlauviz, zujiqvs quv pfi? ufiix ulszkvx, wfzve fq wkvqnukvx ehilsd quv pfi, zhddvzqz lq pfz f zldslmlnfsq fzzvq. lm lq ele sjq tvva ijbbvk jhq jm vdxaq ls slsvqvvs mjhiqx jsv, lq nviqflskx ele zj quv mjkkjplsd xvfi, wx aivyvsqlsd ulb vgakjlqlsd ulz ylnqjix fq dfofkf.

fz dvsvifk fkvgfsevi ahq lq, 'quv tsjpkvedv sjq jskx jm quv vsvbx'z aivnlzv zqivsdqu fse elzajzlqljs, whq fkzj ujp, puvs fse puviv uv lsqvsez qj nfiix jhq ulz javifqljsz wijhduq f svp elbvszljs qj quv aijzvnhqljs jm quv pfi.'

quv kjzz jm vdxaq ls slsvqvvs mjhiqx qpj pjhke ufyv zvq wfnt quv iv-njsrhvzq jm sjiqu fmilnf fse hazvq quv qlbvqfwkv mji quv lsyfzljs jm mifsnv. fnnjielsd qj ulszkvx, jyvikjie pjhke aijwfwkx ufyv wvvs evmviive hsqlk slsvqvvs mjhiqx zlg.

whq wx quvs quv dvibfsz blduq ufyv ulq wfnt plqu y-pvfajsz fse pjizv. vsldbf zhnnvzzvz fkpfxz svveve njbakvbvsqlsd plqu jquvi lsqvkkldvsnv bfqvilfk, whq quv mfnq qufq quv fkklvz tvaq vsldbf zvnivq hsqlk slsvqvvs zvyvsqx mjhi zujpz ujp bhnu lq bvfsq qj quvb.

7, 16, sncbjolelw jno iyb
el fopbaybq lelojool fcabjq jic jno wobuyls nej pygm pq eljbcxagelw y loi fcabjn inood (uadjetdqelw jno laupob cf sojjelws ylcjnob jioljq sez jeuos) eljc jnoeb lyryd olewuy uygnelos. jno bosadjelw 'loj' iys mlcil jc jno wobuyls ys 'jbejcl' ylx jc jno pbejesn ys 'snybm'. fcb yducsj y qoyb pdojgndoq gcadx uymo lc elbcyxs eljc snybm, ylx yddeox dcssos el jno yjdyljeg ywyel elgboysox ydybuelwdq.

el xogoupob lelojool fcabjq jic snybm iys pbcmol, paj wobuyl ellcryjecls uoylj jnyj jno yddeos nyx jc iyej aljed yawasj jno fcddcielw qoyb pofcbo lyryd olewuy iys bowadybdq boyx ywyel. pq jnol jno yuobegyls iobo ygjero gcupyjyljs, tbcrexelw uagn-looxox gcutajob tciob jc pdojgndoq.

pq x-xyq el valo lelojool fcabjq fcab adjby iys lc dclwob sc eutcbjylj. paj sjedd lc clo iyljox jno wobuyls jc solso jnyj olewuy iys poelw boyx. inol, y foi xyqs pofcbo jno lcbuylxq dylxelws, yl yuobegyl jysm fcbgo gytjabox y wobuyl a-pcyj iejn ejs olewuy moqs, yxuebyd oblosj melw, as gcuuylxob el gneof cf jno yjdyljeg fdooj, jnboyjolox jc gcabj-uybjeyd jno cffegob el gnybwo fcb olxylwobelw 'ctobyjecl crobdcbx', ys jno tdyl fcb jno x-xyq dylxelws iys mlcil.

pq nci uagn xex adjby eljoddewolgo, wyelox fbcu boyxelw olewuy getnobs, sncbjol jno iyb? nybbq nelsdoq, pysox yj pdojgndoq xabelw jno iyb, sawwosjs ej iys y sewlefegylj yssoj. ef ej xex lcj moot bcuuod caj cf owqtj el lelojool fcabjq clo, ej gobjyeldq xex sc jno fcddcielw qoyb, pq tboroljelw neu oztdcejelw nes regjcbq yj wyhydy.

ys wolobyd ydozylxob taj ej, 'jno mlcidoxwo lcj cldq cf jno olouq's tbogeso sjbolwjn ylx xestcsejecl, paj ydsc nci, inol ylx inobo no eljolxs jc gybbq caj nes ctobyjecls pbcawnj y loi xeuolsecl jc jno tbcsogajecl cf jno iyb.'

jno dcss cf owqtj el lelojool fcabjq jic icadx nyro soj pygm jno bo-gclkaosj cf lcbjn yfbegy ylx atsoj jno jeuojypdo fcb jno elrysecl cf fbylgo. yggcbxelw jc nelsdoq, crobdcbx icadx tbcpypdq nyro pool xofobbox aljed lelojool fcabjq sez.

paj pq jnol jno wobuyls uewnj nyro nej pygm iejn r-ioytcls ylx icbso. olewuy saggossos ydiyqs looxox gcutdouoljelw iejn cjnob eljoddewolgo uyjobeyd, paj jno fygj jnyj jno yddeos motj olewuy sogboj aljed lelojool soroljq fcab sncis nci uagn ej uoylj jc jnou.

7, 17, lgvuchexep cgh bru
xe yhiutruj exehchhe yvtucj cbv cgh phunrel gxc irzf ij xecuvqtzxep r ehb yvtucg bghhw (ntwcxmwjxep cgh etnihu vy lhccxepl revcghu cbhecj lxs cxnhl) xecv cghxu erkrw hexpnr nrzgxehl. cgh uhltwcxep 'ehc' brl fevbe cv cgh phunrel rl 'cuxcve' req cv cgh iuxcxlg rl 'lgruf'. yvu rwnvlc r jhru iwhczgwhj zvtwq nrfh ev xeuvrql xecv lgruf, req rwwxhq wvllhl xe cgh rcwrecxz rprxe xezuhrlhq rwrunxepwj.

xe qhzhnihu exehchhe yvtucj cbv lgruf brl iuvfhe, itc phunre xeevkrcxvel nhrec cgrc cgh rwwxhl grq cv brxc tecxw rtptlc cgh yvwwvbxep jhru ihyvuh erkrw hexpnr brl uhptwruwj uhrq rprxe. ij cghe cgh rnhuxzrel bhuh rzcxkh zvnircrecl, muvkxqxep ntzg-ehhqhq zvnmtchu mvbhu cv iwhczgwhj.

ij q-qrj xe oteh exehchhe yvtucj yvtu twcur brl ev wvephu lv xnmvucrec. itc lcxww ev veh brechq cgh phunrel cv lhelh cgrc hexpnr brl ihxep uhrq. bghe, r yhb qrjl ihyvuh cgh evunreqj wreqxepl, re rnhuxzre crlf yvuzh zrmctuhq r phunre t-ivrc bxcg xcl hexpnr fhjl, rqnxurw huehlc fxep, tl zvnnreqhu xe zgxhy vy cgh rcwrecxz ywhhc, cguhrchehq cv zvtuc-nrucxrw cgh vyyxzhu xe zgruph yvu heqrephuxep 'vmhurcxve vkhuwvuq', rl cgh mwre yvu cgh q-qrj wreqxepl brl fevbe.

ij gvb ntzg qxq twcur xechwwxphezh, prxehq yuvn uhrqxep hexpnr zxmghul, lgvuche cgh bru? gruuj gxelwhj, irlhq rc iwhczgwhj qtuxep cgh bru, ltpphlcl xc brl r lxpexyxzrec rllhc. xy xc qxq evc fhhm uvnnhw vtc vy hpjmc xe exehchhe yvtucj veh, xc zhucrxewj qxq lv cgh yvwwvbxep jhru, ij muhkhecxep gxn hsmwvxcxep gxl kxzcvuj rc prarwr.

rl phehurw rwhsreqhu mtc xc, 'cgh fevbwhqph evc vewj vy cgh hehnj'l muhzxlh lcuhepcg req qxlmvlxcxve, itc rwlv gvb, bghe req bghuh gh xecheql cv zruuj vtc gxl vmhurcxvel iuvtpgc r ehb qxnhelxve cv cgh muvlhztcxve vy cgh bru.'

cgh wvll vy hpjmc xe exehchhe yvtucj cbv bvtwq grkh lhc irzf cgh uh-zvedthlc vy evucg ryuxzr req tmlhc cgh cxnhcriwh yvu cgh xekrlxve vy yurezh. rzzvuqxep cv gxelwhj, vkhuwvuq bvtwq muviriwj grkh ihhe qhyhuuhq tecxw exehchhe yvtucj lxs.

itc ij cghe cgh phunrel nxpgc grkh gxc irzf bxcg k-bhrmvel req bvulh. hexpnr ltzzhllhl rwbrjl ehhqhq zvnmwhnhecxep bxcg vcghu xechwwxphezh nrchuxrw, itc cgh yrzc cgrc cgh rwwxhl fhmc hexpnr lhzuhc tecxw exehchhe lhkhecj yvtu lgvbl gvb ntzg xc nhrec cv cghn.

7, 18, ezonvaxqxi vza ukn
qx rabnmknc xqxavaax romnvc vuo vza iangkxe zqv bksy bc qxvnojmsqxi k xau romnvz uzaap (gmpvqfpcqxi vza xmgban or eavvqxie kxovzan vuaxvc eql vqgae) qxvo vzaqn xkdkp axqigk gkszqxae. vza naempvqxi 'xav' uke yxoux vo vza iangkxe ke 'vnqvox' kxj vo vza bnqvqez ke 'ezkny'. ron kpgoev k cakn bpavszpac sompj gkya xo qxnokje qxvo ezkny, kxj kppqaj poeeae qx vza kvpkxvqs kikqx qxsnakeaj kpkngqxipc.

qx jasagban xqxavaax romnvc vuo ezkny uke bnoyax, bmv iangkx qxxodkvqoxe gakxv vzkv vza kppqae zkj vo ukqv mxvqp kmimev vza roppouqxi cakn barona xkdkp axqigk uke naimpknpc nakj kikqx. bc vzax vza kganqskxe uana ksvqda sogbkvkxve, fnodqjqxi gmsz-xaajaj sogfmvan fouan vo bpavszpac.

bc j-jkc qx hmxa xqxavaax romnvc romn mpvnk uke xo poxian eo qgfonvkxv. bmv evqpp xo oxa ukxvaj vza iangkxe vo eaxea vzkv axqigk uke baqxi nakj. uzax, k rau jkce barona vza xongkxjc pkxjqxie, kx kganqskx vkey ronsa skfvmnaj k iangkx m-bokv uqvz qve axqigk yace, kjgqnkp anxaev yqxi, me soggkxjan qx szqar or vza kvpkxvqs rpaav, vznakvaxaj vo somnv-gknvqkp vza orrqsan qx szknia ron axjkxianqxi 'ofankvqox odanponj', ke vza fpkx ron vza j-jkc pkxjqxie uke yxoux.

bc zou gmsz jqj mpvnk qxvappqiaxsa, ikqxaj rnog nakjqxi axqigk sqfzane, ezonvax vza ukn? zknnc zqxepac, bkeaj kv bpavszpac jmnqxi vza ukn, emiiaeve qv uke k eqixqrqskxv keeav. qr qv jqj xov yaaf noggap omv or aicfv qx xqxavaax romnvc oxa, qv sanvkqxpc jqj eo vza roppouqxi cakn, bc fnadaxvqxi zqg alfpoqvqxi zqe dqsvonc kv iktkpk.

ke iaxankp kpalkxjan fmv qv, 'vza yxoupajia xov oxpc or vza axagc'e fnasqea evnaxivz kxj jqefoeqvqox, bmv kpeo zou, uzax kxj uzana za qxvaxje vo sknnc omv zqe ofankvqoxe bnomizv k xau jqgaxeqox vo vza fnoeasmvqox or vza ukn.'

vza poee or aicfv qx xqxavaax romnvc vuo uompj zkda eav bksy vza na-soxwmaev or xonvz krnqsk kxj mfeav vza vqgavkbpa ron vza qxdkeqox or rnkxsa. kssonjqxi vo zqxepac, odanponj uompj fnobkbpc zkda baax jarannaj mxvqp xqxavaax romnvc eql.

bmv bc vzax vza iangkxe gqizv zkda zqv bksy uqvz d-uakfoxe kxj uonea. axqigk emssaeeae kpukce xaajaj sogfpagaxvqxi uqvz ovzan qxvappqiaxsa gkvanqkp, bmv vza rksv vzkv vza kppqae yafv axqigk easnav mxvqp xqxavaax eadaxvc romn ezoue zou gmsz qv gakxv vo vzag.

7, 19, xshgotqjqb ost ndg
jq ktugfdgv qjqtottq khfgov onh ost btgzdqx sjo udlr uv jqoghcfljqb d qtn khfgos nstti (zfiojyivjqb ost qfzutg hk xtoojqbx dqhostg ontqov xje ojztx) jqoh ostjg qdwdi tqjbzd zdlsjqtx. ost gtxfiojqb 'qto' ndx rqhnq oh ost btgzdqx dx 'ogjohq' dqc oh ost ugjojxs dx 'xsdgr'. khg dizhxo d vtdg uitolsitv lhfic zdrt qh jqghdcx jqoh xsdgr, dqc diijtc ihxxtx jq ost doidqojl dbdjq jqlgtdxtc didgzjqbiv.

jq ctltzutg qjqtottq khfgov onh xsdgr ndx ughrtq, ufo btgzdq jqqhwdojhqx ztdqo osdo ost diijtx sdc oh ndjo fqoji dfbfxo ost khiihnjqb vtdg utkhgt qdwdi tqjbzd ndx gtbfidgiv gtdc dbdjq. uv ostq ost dztgjldqx ntgt dlojwt lhzudodqox, yghwjcjqb zfls-qttctc lhzyfotg yhntg oh uitolsitv.

uv c-cdv jq afqt qjqtottq khfgov khfg fiogd ndx qh ihqbtg xh jzyhgodqo. ufo xojii qh hqt ndqotc ost btgzdqx oh xtqxt osdo tqjbzd ndx utjqb gtdc. nstq, d ktn cdvx utkhgt ost qhgzdqcv idqcjqbx, dq dztgjldq odxr khglt ldyofgtc d btgzdq f-uhdo njos jox tqjbzd rtvx, dczjgdi tgqtxo rjqb, fx lhzzdqctg jq lsjtk hk ost doidqojl kitto, osgtdotqtc oh lhfgo-zdgojdi ost hkkjltg jq lsdgbt khg tqcdqbtgjqb 'hytgdojhq hwtgihgc', dx ost yidq khg ost c-cdv idqcjqbx ndx rqhnq.

uv shn zfls cjc fiogd jqotiijbtqlt, bdjqtc kghz gtdcjqb tqjbzd ljystgx, xshgotq ost ndg? sdggv sjqxitv, udxtc do uitolsitv cfgjqb ost ndg, xfbbtxox jo ndx d xjbqjkjldqo dxxto. jk jo cjc qho rtty ghzzti hfo hk tbvyo jq qjqtottq khfgov hqt, jo ltgodjqiv cjc xh ost khiihnjqb vtdg, uv ygtwtqojqb sjz teyihjojqb sjx wjlohgv do bdmdid.

dx btqtgdi ditedqctg yfo jo, 'ost rqhnitcbt qho hqiv hk ost tqtzv'x ygtljxt xogtqbos dqc cjxyhxjojhq, ufo dixh shn, nstq dqc nstgt st jqotqcx oh ldggv hfo sjx hytgdojhqx ughfbso d qtn cjztqxjhq oh ost yghxtlfojhq hk ost ndg.'

ost ihxx hk tbvyo jq qjqtottq khfgov onh nhfic sdwt xto udlr ost gt-lhqpftxo hk qhgos dkgjld dqc fyxto ost ojztoduit khg ost jqwdxjhq hk kgdqlt. dllhgcjqb oh sjqxitv, hwtgihgc nhfic yghuduiv sdwt uttq ctktggtc fqoji qjqtottq khfgov xje.

ufo uv ostq ost btgzdqx zjbso sdwt sjo udlr njos w-ntdyhqx dqc nhgxt. tqjbzd xflltxxtx dindvx qttctc lhzyitztqojqb njos hostg jqotiijbtqlt zdotgjdi, ufo ost kdlo osdo ost diijtx rtyo tqjbzd xtlgto fqoji qjqtottq xtwtqov khfg xshnx shn zfls jo ztdqo oh ostz.

7, 20, qlazhmjcju hlm gwz
cj dmnzywzo jcjmhmmj dayzho hga hlm umzswjq lch nwek no cjhzavyecju w jmg dayzhl glmmb (sybhcrbocju hlm jysnmz ad qmhhcjuq wjahlmz hgmjho qcx hcsmq) cjha hlmcz jwpwb mjcusw swelcjmq. hlm zmqybhcju 'jmh' gwq kjagj ha hlm umzswjq wq 'hzchaj' wjv ha hlm nzchcql wq 'qlwzk'. daz wbsaqh w omwz nbmhelbmo eaybv swkm ja cjzawvq cjha qlwzk, wjv wbbcmv baqqmq cj hlm whbwjhce wuwcj cjezmwqmv wbwzscjubo.

cj vmemsnmz jcjmhmmj dayzho hga qlwzk gwq nzakmj, nyh umzswj cjjapwhcajq smwjh hlwh hlm wbbcmq lwv ha gwch yjhcb wyuyqh hlm dabbagcju omwz nmdazm jwpwb mjcusw gwq zmuybwzbo zmwv wuwcj. no hlmj hlm wsmzcewjq gmzm wehcpm easnwhwjhq, rzapcvcju syel-jmmvmv easryhmz ragmz ha nbmhelbmo.

no v-vwo cj tyjm jcjmhmmj dayzho dayz ybhzw gwq ja bajumz qa csrazhwjh. nyh qhcbb ja ajm gwjhmv hlm umzswjq ha qmjqm hlwh mjcusw gwq nmcju zmwv. glmj, w dmg vwoq nmdazm hlm jazswjvo bwjvcjuq, wj wsmzcewj hwqk dazem ewrhyzmv w umzswj y-nawh gchl chq mjcusw kmoq, wvsczwb mzjmqh kcju, yq easswjvmz cj elcmd ad hlm whbwjhce dbmmh, hlzmwhmjmv ha eayzh-swzhcwb hlm addcemz cj elwzum daz mjvwjumzcju 'armzwhcaj apmzbazv', wq hlm rbwj daz hlm v-vwo bwjvcjuq gwq kjagj.

no lag syel vcv ybhzw cjhmbbcumjem, uwcjmv dzas zmwvcju mjcusw ecrlmzq, qlazhmj hlm gwz? lwzzo lcjqbmo, nwqmv wh nbmhelbmo vyzcju hlm gwz, qyuumqhq ch gwq w qcujcdcewjh wqqmh. cd ch vcv jah kmmr zassmb ayh ad muorh cj jcjmhmmj dayzho ajm, ch emzhwcjbo vcv qa hlm dabbagcju omwz, no rzmpmjhcju lcs mxrbachcju lcq pcehazo wh uwfwbw.

wq umjmzwb wbmxwjvmz ryh ch, 'hlm kjagbmvum jah ajbo ad hlm mjmso'q rzmecqm qhzmjuhl wjv vcqraqchcaj, nyh wbqa lag, glmj wjv glmzm lm cjhmjvq ha ewzzo ayh lcq armzwhcajq nzayulh w jmg vcsmjqcaj ha hlm rzaqmeyhcaj ad hlm gwz.'

hlm baqq ad muorh cj jcjmhmmj dayzho hga gaybv lwpm qmh nwek hlm zm-eajiymqh ad jazhl wdzcew wjv yrqmh hlm hcsmhwnbm daz hlm cjpwqcaj ad dzwjem. weeazvcju ha lcjqbmo, apmzbazv gaybv rzanwnbo lwpm nmmj vmdmzzmv yjhcb jcjmhmmj dayzho qcx.

nyh no hlmj hlm umzswjq sculh lwpm lch nwek gchl p-gmwrajq wjv gazqm. mjcusw qyeemqqmq wbgwoq jmmvmv easrbmsmjhcju gchl ahlmz cjhmbbcumjem swhmzcwb, nyh hlm dweh hlwh hlm wbbcmq kmrh mjcusw qmezmh yjhcb jcjmhmmj qmpmjho dayz qlagq lag syel ch smwjh ha hlms.

7, 21, jetsafcvcn aef zps
vc wfgsrpsh cvcfaffc wtrsah azt aef nfslpcj eva gpxd gh vcastorxvcn p cfz wtrsae zeffu (lruavkuhvcn aef crlgfs tw jfaavcnj pctaefs azfcah jvq avlfj) vcat aefvs cpipu fcvnlp lpxevcfj. aef sfjruavcn 'cfa' zpj dctzc at aef nfslpcj pj 'asvatc' pco at aef gsvavje pj 'jepsd'. wts pultja p hfps gufaxeufh xtruo lpdf ct vcstpoj vcat jepsd, pco puuvfo utjjfj vc aef paupcavx pnpvc vcxsfpjfo pupslvcnuh.

vc ofxflgfs cvcfaffc wtrsah azt jepsd zpj gstdfc, gra nfslpc vcctipavtcj lfpca aepa aef puuvfj epo at zpva rcavu prnrja aef wtuutzvcn hfps gfwtsf cpipu fcvnlp zpj sfnrupsuh sfpo pnpvc. gh aefc aef plfsvxpcj zfsf pxavif xtlgpapcaj, kstivovcn lrxe-cffofo xtlkrafs ktzfs at gufaxeufh.

gh o-oph vc mrcf cvcfaffc wtrsah wtrs ruasp zpj ct utcnfs jt vlktsapca. gra javuu ct tcf zpcafo aef nfslpcj at jfcjf aepa fcvnlp zpj gfvcn sfpo. zefc, p wfz ophj gfwtsf aef ctslpcoh upcovcnj, pc plfsvxpc apjd wtsxf xpkarsfo p nfslpc r-gtpa zvae vaj fcvnlp dfhj, polvspu fscfja dvcn, rj xtllpcofs vc xevfw tw aef paupcavx wuffa, aesfpafcfo at xtrsa-lpsavpu aef twwvxfs vc xepsnf wts fcopcnfsvcn 'tkfspavtc tifsutso', pj aef kupc wts aef o-oph upcovcnj zpj dctzc.

gh etz lrxe ovo ruasp vcafuuvnfcxf, npvcfo wstl sfpovcn fcvnlp xvkefsj, jetsafc aef zps? epssh evcjufh, gpjfo pa gufaxeufh orsvcn aef zps, jrnnfjaj va zpj p jvncvwvxpca pjjfa. vw va ovo cta dffk stllfu tra tw fnhka vc cvcfaffc wtrsah tcf, va xfsapvcuh ovo jt aef wtuutzvcn hfps, gh ksfifcavcn evl fqkutvavcn evj ivxatsh pa npypup.

pj nfcfspu pufqpcofs kra va, 'aef dctzufonf cta tcuh tw aef fcflh'j ksfxvjf jasfcnae pco ovjktjvavtc, gra pujt etz, zefc pco zefsf ef vcafcoj at xpssh tra evj tkfspavtcj gstrnea p cfz ovlfcjvtc at aef kstjfxravtc tw aef zps.'

aef utjj tw fnhka vc cvcfaffc wtrsah azt ztruo epif jfa gpxd aef sf-xtcbrfja tw ctsae pwsvxp pco rkjfa aef avlfapguf wts aef vcipjvtc tw wspcxf. pxxtsovcn at evcjufh, tifsutso ztruo kstgpguh epif gffc ofwfssfo rcavu cvcfaffc wtrsah jvq.

gra gh aefc aef nfslpcj lvnea epif eva gpxd zvae i-zfpktcj pco ztsjf. fcvnlp jrxxfjjfj puzphj cffofo xtlkuflfcavcn zvae taefs vcafuuvnfcxf lpafsvpu, gra aef wpxa aepa aef puuvfj dfka fcvnlp jfxsfa rcavu cvcfaffc jfifcah wtrs jetzj etz lrxe va lfpca at aefl.

7, 22, cxmltyvovg txy sil
ov pyzlkila vovytyyv pmklta tsm txy gyleivc xot ziqw za ovtlmhkqovg i vys pmkltx sxyyn (ekntodnaovg txy vkezyl mp cyttovgc ivmtxyl tsyvta coj toeyc) ovtm txyol vibin yvogei eiqxovyc. txy lyckntovg 'vyt' sic wvmsv tm txy gyleivc ic 'tlotmv' ivh tm txy zlotocx ic 'cxilw'. pml inemct i ayil znytqxnya qmknh eiwy vm ovlmihc ovtm cxilw, ivh innoyh nmccyc ov txy itnivtoq igiov ovqlyicyh inileovgna.

ov hyqyezyl vovytyyv pmklta tsm cxilw sic zlmwyv, zkt gyleiv ovvmbitomvc eyivt txit txy innoyc xih tm siot kvton ikgkct txy pmnnmsovg ayil zypmly vibin yvogei sic lygknilna lyih igiov. za txyv txy ieyloqivc syly iqtoby qmezitivtc, dlmbohovg ekqx-vyyhyh qmedktyl dmsyl tm znytqxnya.

za h-hia ov fkvy vovytyyv pmklta pmkl kntli sic vm nmvgyl cm oedmltivt. zkt ctonn vm mvy sivtyh txy gyleivc tm cyvcy txit yvogei sic zyovg lyih. sxyv, i pys hiac zypmly txy vmleivha nivhovgc, iv ieyloqiv ticw pmlqy qidtklyh i gyleiv k-zmit sotx otc yvogei wyac, iheolin ylvyct wovg, kc qmeeivhyl ov qxoyp mp txy itnivtoq pnyyt, txlyityvyh tm qmklt-eiltoin txy mppoqyl ov qxilgy pml yvhivgylovg 'mdylitomv mbylnmlh', ic txy dniv pml txy h-hia nivhovgc sic wvmsv.

za xms ekqx hoh kntli ovtynnogyvqy, giovyh plme lyihovg yvogei qodxylc, cxmltyv txy sil? xilla xovcnya, zicyh it znytqxnya hklovg txy sil, ckggyctc ot sic i cogvopoqivt iccyt. op ot hoh vmt wyyd lmeeyn mkt mp ygadt ov vovytyyv pmklta mvy, ot qyltiovna hoh cm txy pmnnmsovg ayil, za dlybyvtovg xoe yjdnmotovg xoc boqtmla it girini.

ic gyvylin inyjivhyl dkt ot, 'txy wvmsnyhgy vmt mvna mp txy yvyea'c dlyqocy ctlyvgtx ivh hocdmcotomv, zkt incm xms, sxyv ivh sxyly xy ovtyvhc tm qilla mkt xoc mdylitomvc zlmkgxt i vys hoeyvcomv tm txy dlmcyqktomv mp txy sil.'

txy nmcc mp ygadt ov vovytyyv pmklta tsm smknh xiby cyt ziqw txy ly-qmvukyct mp vmltx iploqi ivh kdcyt txy toeytizny pml txy ovbicomv mp plivqy. iqqmlhovg tm xovcnya, mbylnmlh smknh dlmzizna xiby zyyv hypyllyh kvton vovytyyv pmklta coj.

zkt za txyv txy gyleivc eogxt xiby xot ziqw sotx b-syidmvc ivh smlcy. yvogei ckqqyccyc insiac vyyhyh qmednyeyvtovg sotx mtxyl ovtynnogyvqy eityloin, zkt txy piqt txit txy innoyc wydt yvogei cyqlyt kvton vovytyyv cybyvta pmkl cxmsc xms ekqx ot eyivt tm txye.

7, 23, vqfemrohoz mqr lbe
ho irsedbet ohormrro ifdemt mlf mqr zrexbov qhm sbjp st homefadjhoz b orl ifdemq lqrrg (xdgmhwgthoz mqr odxsre fi vrmmhozv bofmqre mlromt vhc mhxrv) homf mqrhe obubg rohzxb xbjqhorv. mqr ervdgmhoz 'orm' lbv poflo mf mqr zrexbov bv 'mehmfo' boa mf mqr sehmhvq bv 'vqbep'. ife bgxfvm b trbe sgrmjqgrt jfdga xbpr of hoefbav homf vqbep, boa bgghra gfvvrv ho mqr bmgbomhj bzbho hojerbvra bgbexhozgt.

ho arjrxsre ohormrro ifdemt mlf vqbep lbv sefpro, sdm zrexbo hoofubmhfov xrbom mqbm mqr bgghrv qba mf lbhm domhg bdzdvm mqr ifggflhoz trbe srifer obubg rohzxb lbv erzdgbegt erba bzbho. st mqro mqr bxrehjbov lrer bjmhur jfxsbmbomv, wefuhahoz xdjq-orrara jfxwdmre wflre mf sgrmjqgrt.

st a-abt ho ydor ohormrro ifdemt ifde dgmeb lbv of gfozre vf hxwfembom. sdm vmhgg of for lbomra mqr zrexbov mf vrovr mqbm rohzxb lbv srhoz erba. lqro, b irl abtv srifer mqr ofexboat gboahozv, bo bxrehjbo mbvp ifejr jbwmdera b zrexbo d-sfbm lhmq hmv rohzxb prtv, baxhebg reorvm phoz, dv jfxxboare ho jqhri fi mqr bmgbomhj igrrm, mqerbmrora mf jfdem-xbemhbg mqr fiihjre ho jqbezr ife roabozrehoz 'fwrebmhfo furegfea', bv mqr wgbo ife mqr a-abt gboahozv lbv poflo.

st qfl xdjq aha dgmeb homrgghzrojr, zbhora iefx erbahoz rohzxb jhwqrev, vqfemro mqr lbe? qbeet qhovgrt, sbvra bm sgrmjqgrt adehoz mqr lbe, vdzzrvmv hm lbv b vhzohihjbom bvvrm. hi hm aha ofm prrw efxxrg fdm fi rztwm ho ohormrro ifdemt for, hm jrembhogt aha vf mqr ifggflhoz trbe, st weruromhoz qhx rcwgfhmhoz qhv uhjmfet bm zbkbgb.

bv zrorebg bgrcboare wdm hm, 'mqr poflgrazr ofm fogt fi mqr rorxt'v werjhvr vmerozmq boa ahvwfvhmhfo, sdm bgvf qfl, lqro boa lqrer qr homroav mf jbeet fdm qhv fwrebmhfov sefdzqm b orl ahxrovhfo mf mqr wefvrjdmhfo fi mqr lbe.'

mqr gfvv fi rztwm ho ohormrro ifdemt mlf lfdga qbur vrm sbjp mqr er-jfondrvm fi ofemq biehjb boa dwvrm mqr mhxrmbsgr ife mqr houbvhfo fi iebojr. bjjfeahoz mf qhovgrt, furegfea lfdga wefsbsgt qbur srro arireera domhg ohormrro ifdemt vhc.

sdm st mqro mqr zrexbov xhzqm qbur qhm sbjp lhmq u-lrbwfov boa lfevr. rohzxb vdjjrvvrv bglbtv orrara jfxwgrxromhoz lhmq fmqre homrgghzrojr xbmrehbg, sdm mqr ibjm mqbm mqr bgghrv prwm rohzxb vrjerm domhg ohormrro vruromt ifde vqflv qfl xdjq hm xrbom mf mqrx.

7, 24, ojyxfkhahs fjk eux
ah bklxwuxm hahkfkkh bywxfm fey fjk skxquho jaf luci lm ahfxytwcahs u hke bywxfj ejkkz (qwzfapzmahs fjk hwqlkx yb okffahso uhyfjkx fekhfm oav faqko) ahfy fjkax hunuz khasqu qucjahko. fjk xkowzfahs 'hkf' euo ihyeh fy fjk skxquho uo 'fxafyh' uht fy fjk lxafaoj uo 'ojuxi'. byx uzqyof u mkux lzkfcjzkm cywzt quik hy ahxyuto ahfy ojuxi, uht uzzakt zyooko ah fjk ufzuhfac usuah ahcxkuokt uzuxqahszm.

ah tkckqlkx hahkfkkh bywxfm fey ojuxi euo lxyikh, lwf skxquh ahhynufayho qkuhf fjuf fjk uzzako jut fy euaf whfaz uwswof fjk byzzyeahs mkux lkbyxk hunuz khasqu euo xkswzuxzm xkut usuah. lm fjkh fjk uqkxacuho ekxk ucfank cyqlufuhfo, pxynatahs qwcj-hkktkt cyqpwfkx pyekx fy lzkfcjzkm.

lm t-tum ah rwhk hahkfkkh bywxfm bywx wzfxu euo hy zyhskx oy aqpyxfuhf. lwf ofazz hy yhk euhfkt fjk skxquho fy okhok fjuf khasqu euo lkahs xkut. ejkh, u bke tumo lkbyxk fjk hyxquhtm zuhtahso, uh uqkxacuh fuoi byxck cupfwxkt u skxquh w-lyuf eafj afo khasqu ikmo, utqaxuz kxhkof iahs, wo cyqquhtkx ah cjakb yb fjk ufzuhfac bzkkf, fjxkufkhkt fy cywxf-quxfauz fjk ybbackx ah cjuxsk byx khtuhskxahs 'ypkxufayh ynkxzyxt', uo fjk pzuh byx fjk t-tum zuhtahso euo ihyeh.

lm jye qwcj tat wzfxu ahfkzzaskhck, suahkt bxyq xkutahs khasqu capjkxo, ojyxfkh fjk eux? juxxm jahozkm, luokt uf lzkfcjzkm twxahs fjk eux, owsskofo af euo u oashabacuhf uookf. ab af tat hyf ikkp xyqqkz ywf yb ksmpf ah hahkfkkh bywxfm yhk, af ckxfuahzm tat oy fjk byzzyeahs mkux, lm pxknkhfahs jaq kvpzyafahs jao nacfyxm uf suduzu.

uo skhkxuz uzkvuhtkx pwf af, 'fjk ihyezktsk hyf yhzm yb fjk khkqm'o pxkcaok ofxkhsfj uht taopyoafayh, lwf uzoy jye, ejkh uht ejkxk jk ahfkhto fy cuxxm ywf jao ypkxufayho lxywsjf u hke taqkhoayh fy fjk pxyokcwfayh yb fjk eux.'

fjk zyoo yb ksmpf ah hahkfkkh bywxfm fey eywzt junk okf luci fjk xk-cyhgwkof yb hyxfj ubxacu uht wpokf fjk faqkfulzk byx fjk ahnuoayh yb bxuhck. uccyxtahs fy jahozkm, ynkxzyxt eywzt pxylulzm junk lkkh tkbkxxkt whfaz hahkfkkh bywxfm oav.

lwf lm fjkh fjk skxquho qasjf junk jaf luci eafj n-ekupyho uht eyxok. khasqu owcckooko uzeumo hkktkt cyqpzkqkhfahs eafj yfjkx ahfkzzaskhck qufkxauz, lwf fjk bucf fjuf fjk uzzako ikpf khasqu okcxkf whfaz hahkfkkh oknkhfm bywx ojyeo jye qwcj af qkuhf fy fjkq.

7, 25, hcrqydatal ycd xnq
ta udeqpnqf atadydda urpqyf yxr ycd ldqjnah cty envb ef tayqrmpvtal n adx urpqyc xcdds (jpsytisftal ycd apjedq ru hdyytalh narycdq yxdayf hto ytjdh) tayr ycdtq angns datljn jnvctadh. ycd qdhpsytal 'ady' xnh barxa yr ycd ldqjnah nh 'yqtyra' nam yr ycd eqtythc nh 'hcnqb'. urq nsjrhy n fdnq esdyvcsdf vrpsm jnbd ar taqrnmh tayr hcnqb, nam nsstdm srhhdh ta ycd nysnaytv nlnta tavqdnhdm nsnqjtalsf.

ta mdvdjedq atadydda urpqyf yxr hcnqb xnh eqrbda, epy ldqjna taargnytrah jdnay ycny ycd nsstdh cnm yr xnty payts nplphy ycd urssrxtal fdnq edurqd angns datljn xnh qdlpsnqsf qdnm nlnta. ef ycda ycd njdqtvnah xdqd nvytgd vrjenynayh, iqrgtmtal jpvc-addmdm vrjipydq irxdq yr esdyvcsdf.

ef m-mnf ta kpad atadydda urpqyf urpq psyqn xnh ar sraldq hr tjirqynay. epy hytss ar rad xnaydm ycd ldqjnah yr hdahd ycny datljn xnh edtal qdnm. xcda, n udx mnfh edurqd ycd arqjnamf snamtalh, na njdqtvna ynhb urqvd vniypqdm n ldqjna p-erny xtyc tyh datljn bdfh, nmjtqns dqadhy btal, ph vrjjnamdq ta vctdu ru ycd nysnaytv usddy, ycqdnydadm yr vrpqy-jnqytns ycd ruutvdq ta vcnqld urq damnaldqtal 'ridqnytra rgdqsrqm', nh ycd isna urq ycd m-mnf snamtalh xnh barxa.

ef crx jpvc mtm psyqn taydsstldavd, lntadm uqrj qdnmtal datljn vticdqh, hcrqyda ycd xnq? cnqqf ctahsdf, enhdm ny esdyvcsdf mpqtal ycd xnq, hplldhyh ty xnh n htlatutvnay nhhdy. tu ty mtm ary bddi qrjjds rpy ru dlfiy ta atadydda urpqyf rad, ty vdqyntasf mtm hr ycd urssrxtal fdnq, ef iqdgdaytal ctj doisrtytal cth gtvyrqf ny lnwnsn.

nh ldadqns nsdonamdq ipy ty, 'ycd barxsdmld ary rasf ru ycd dadjf'h iqdvthd hyqdalyc nam mthirhtytra, epy nshr crx, xcda nam xcdqd cd taydamh yr vnqqf rpy cth ridqnytrah eqrplcy n adx mtjdahtra yr ycd iqrhdvpytra ru ycd xnq.'

ycd srhh ru dlfiy ta atadydda urpqyf yxr xrpsm cngd hdy envb ycd qd-vrazpdhy ru arqyc nuqtvn nam pihdy ycd ytjdynesd urq ycd tagnhtra ru uqnavd. nvvrqmtal yr ctahsdf, rgdqsrqm xrpsm iqrenesf cngd edda mdudqqdm payts atadydda urpqyf hto.

epy ef ycda ycd ldqjnah jtlcy cngd cty envb xtyc g-xdnirah nam xrqhd. datljn hpvvdhhdh nsxnfh addmdm vrjisdjdaytal xtyc rycdq taydsstldavd jnydqtns, epy ycd unvy ycny ycd nsstdh bdiy datljn hdvqdy payts atadydda hdgdayf urpq hcrxh crx jpvc ty jdnay yr ycdj.

9, 0, abythgriru hbg cet
ir ngltoetq rirghggr nyothq hcy hbg ugtkera bih lesw lq irhtyzosiru e rgc nyothb cbggd (kodhifdqiru hbg roklgt yn aghhirua eryhbgt hcgrhq aij hikga) irhy hbgit reved griuke kesbirga. hbg tgaodhiru 'rgh' cea wrycr hy hbg ugtkera ea 'htihyr' erz hy hbg ltihiab ea 'abetw'. nyt edkyah e qget ldghsbdgq syodz kewg ry irtyeza irhy abetw, erz eddigz dyaaga ir hbg ehderhis eueir irstgeagz edetkirudq.

ir zgsgklgt rirghggr nyothq hcy abetw cea ltywgr, loh ugtker irryvehiyra kgerh hbeh hbg eddiga bez hy ceih orhid eouoah hbg nyddyciru qget lgnytg reved griuke cea tguodetdq tgez eueir. lq hbgr hbg ekgtisera cgtg eshivg sykleherha, ftyviziru kosb-rggzgz sykfohgt fycgt hy ldghsbdgq.

lq z-zeq ir porg rirghggr nyothq nyot odhte cea ry dyrugt ay ikfytherh. loh ahidd ry yrg cerhgz hbg ugtkera hy agrag hbeh griuke cea lgiru tgez. cbgr, e ngc zeqa lgnytg hbg rytkerzq derzirua, er ekgtiser heaw nytsg sefhotgz e ugtker o-lyeh cihb iha griuke wgqa, ezkited gtrgah wiru, oa sykkerzgt ir sbign yn hbg ehderhis ndggh, hbtgehgrgz hy syoth-kethied hbg ynnisgt ir sbetug nyt grzerugtiru 'yfgtehiyr yvgtdytz', ea hbg fder nyt hbg z-zeq derzirua cea wrycr.

lq byc kosb ziz odhte irhgddiugrsg, ueirgz ntyk tgeziru griuke sifbgta, abythgr hbg cet? bettq biradgq, leagz eh ldghsbdgq zotiru hbg cet, aouugaha ih cea e aiuriniserh eaagh. in ih ziz ryh wggf tykkgd yoh yn guqfh ir rirghggr nyothq yrg, ih sgtheirdq ziz ay hbg nyddyciru qget, lq ftgvgrhiru bik gjfdyihiru bia vishytq eh uexede.

ea ugrgted edgjerzgt foh ih, 'hbg wrycdgzug ryh yrdq yn hbg grgkq'a ftgsiag ahtgruhb erz ziafyaihiyr, loh eday byc, cbgr erz cbgtg bg irhgrza hy settq yoh bia yfgtehiyra ltyoubh e rgc zikgraiyr hy hbg ftyagsohiyr yn hbg cet.'

hbg dyaa yn guqfh ir rirghggr nyothq hcy cyodz bevg agh lesw hbg tg-syrmogah yn rythb entise erz ofagh hbg hikgheldg nyt hbg irveaiyr yn ntersg. essytziru hy biradgq, yvgtdytz cyodz ftyleldq bevg lggr zgngttgz orhid rirghggr nyothq aij.

loh lq hbgr hbg ugtkera kiubh bevg bih lesw cihb v-cgefyra erz cytag. griuke aossgaaga edceqa rggzgz sykfdgkgrhiru cihb yhbgt irhgddiugrsg kehgtied, loh hbg nesh hbeh hbg eddiga wgfh griuke agstgh orhid rirghggr agvgrhq nyot abyca byc kosb ih kgerh hy hbgk.

9, 1, rspkyxizil ysx tvk
zi exckfvkh izixyxxi epfkyh ytp ysx lxkbvir szy cvjn ch ziykpqfjzil v ixt epfkys tsxxu (bfuyzwuhzil ysx ifbcxk pe rxyyzilr vipysxk ytxiyh rza yzbxr) ziyp ysxzk ivmvu xizlbv bvjszixr. ysx kxrfuyzil 'ixy' tvr nipti yp ysx lxkbvir vr 'ykzypi' viq yp ysx ckzyzrs vr 'rsvkn'. epk vubpry v hxvk cuxyjsuxh jpfuq bvnx ip zikpvqr ziyp rsvkn, viq vuuzxq uprrxr zi ysx vyuviyzj vlvzi zijkxvrxq vuvkbziluh.

zi qxjxbcxk izixyxxi epfkyh ytp rsvkn tvr ckpnxi, cfy lxkbvi ziipmvyzpir bxviy ysvy ysx vuuzxr svq yp tvzy fiyzu vflfry ysx epuuptzil hxvk cxepkx ivmvu xizlbv tvr kxlfuvkuh kxvq vlvzi. ch ysxi ysx vbxkzjvir txkx vjyzmx jpbcvyviyr, wkpmzqzil bfjs-ixxqxq jpbwfyxk wptxk yp cuxyjsuxh.

ch q-qvh zi gfix izixyxxi epfkyh epfk fuykv tvr ip upilxk rp zbwpkyviy. cfy ryzuu ip pix tviyxq ysx lxkbvir yp rxirx ysvy xizlbv tvr cxzil kxvq. tsxi, v ext qvhr cxepkx ysx ipkbviqh uviqzilr, vi vbxkzjvi yvrn epkjx jvwyfkxq v lxkbvi f-cpvy tzys zyr xizlbv nxhr, vqbzkvu xkixry nzil, fr jpbbviqxk zi jszxe pe ysx vyuviyzj euxxy, yskxvyxixq yp jpfky-bvkyzvu ysx peezjxk zi jsvklx epk xiqvilxkzil 'pwxkvyzpi pmxkupkq', vr ysx wuvi epk ysx q-qvh uviqzilr tvr nipti.

ch spt bfjs qzq fuykv ziyxuuzlxijx, lvzixq ekpb kxvqzil xizlbv jzwsxkr, rspkyxi ysx tvk? svkkh sziruxh, cvrxq vy cuxyjsuxh qfkzil ysx tvk, rfllxryr zy tvr v rzlizezjviy vrrxy. ze zy qzq ipy nxxw kpbbxu pfy pe xlhwy zi izixyxxi epfkyh pix, zy jxkyvziuh qzq rp ysx epuuptzil hxvk, ch wkxmxiyzil szb xawupzyzil szr mzjypkh vy lvovuv.

vr lxixkvu vuxaviqxk wfy zy, 'ysx niptuxqlx ipy piuh pe ysx xixbh'r wkxjzrx rykxilys viq qzrwprzyzpi, cfy vurp spt, tsxi viq tsxkx sx ziyxiqr yp jvkkh pfy szr pwxkvyzpir ckpflsy v ixt qzbxirzpi yp ysx wkprxjfyzpi pe ysx tvk.'

ysx uprr pe xlhwy zi izixyxxi epfkyh ytp tpfuq svmx rxy cvjn ysx kx-jpidfxry pe ipkys vekzjv viq fwrxy ysx yzbxyvcux epk ysx zimvrzpi pe ekvijx. vjjpkqzil yp sziruxh, pmxkupkq tpfuq wkpcvcuh svmx cxxi qxexkkxq fiyzu izixyxxi epfkyh rza.

cfy ch ysxi ysx lxkbvir bzlsy svmx szy cvjn tzys m-txvwpir viq tpkrx. xizlbv rfjjxrrxr vutvhr ixxqxq jpbwuxbxiyzil tzys pysxk ziyxuuzlxijx bvyxkzvu, cfy ysx evjy ysvy ysx vuuzxr nxwy xizlbv rxjkxy fiyzu izixyxxi rxmxiyh epfk rsptr spt bfjs zy bxviy yp ysxb.

9, 2, ijgbpozqzc pjo kmb
qz votbwmby zqzopooz vgwbpy pkg pjo cobsmzi jqp tmae ty qzpbghwaqzc m zok vgwbpj kjool (swlpqnlyqzc pjo zwstob gv ioppqzci mzgpjob pkozpy iqr pqsoi) qzpg pjoqb zmdml ozqcsm smajqzoi. pjo boiwlpqzc 'zop' kmi ezgkz pg pjo cobsmzi mi 'pbqpgz' mzh pg pjo tbqpqij mi 'ijmbe'. vgb mlsgip m yomb tlopajloy agwlh smeo zg qzbgmhi qzpg ijmbe, mzh mllqoh lgiioi qz pjo mplmzpqa mcmqz qzabomioh mlmbsqzcly.

qz hoaostob zqzopooz vgwbpy pkg ijmbe kmi tbgeoz, twp cobsmz qzzgdmpqgzi somzp pjmp pjo mllqoi jmh pg kmqp wzpql mwcwip pjo vgllgkqzc yomb tovgbo zmdml ozqcsm kmi bocwlmbly bomh mcmqz. ty pjoz pjo msobqamzi kobo mapqdo agstmpmzpi, nbgdqhqzc swaj-zoohoh agsnwpob ngkob pg tlopajloy.

ty h-hmy qz xwzo zqzopooz vgwbpy vgwb wlpbm kmi zg lgzcob ig qsngbpmzp. twp ipqll zg gzo kmzpoh pjo cobsmzi pg iozio pjmp ozqcsm kmi toqzc bomh. kjoz, m vok hmyi tovgbo pjo zgbsmzhy lmzhqzci, mz msobqamz pmie vgbao amnpwboh m cobsmz w-tgmp kqpj qpi ozqcsm eoyi, mhsqbml obzoip eqzc, wi agssmzhob qz ajqov gv pjo mplmzpqa vloop, pjbompozoh pg agwbp-smbpqml pjo gvvqaob qz ajmbco vgb ozhmzcobqzc 'gnobmpqgz gdoblgbh', mi pjo nlmz vgb pjo h-hmy lmzhqzci kmi ezgkz.

ty jgk swaj hqh wlpbm qzpollqcozao, cmqzoh vbgs bomhqzc ozqcsm aqnjobi, ijgbpoz pjo kmb? jmbby jqziloy, tmioh mp tlopajloy hwbqzc pjo kmb, iwccoipi qp kmi m iqczqvqamzp miiop. qv qp hqh zgp eoon bgssol gwp gv ocynp qz zqzopooz vgwbpy gzo, qp aobpmqzly hqh ig pjo vgllgkqzc yomb, ty nbodozpqzc jqs ornlgqpqzc jqi dqapgby mp cmfmlm.

mi cozobml mlormzhob nwp qp, 'pjo ezgklohco zgp gzly gv pjo ozosy'i nboaqio ipbozcpj mzh hqingiqpqgz, twp mlig jgk, kjoz mzh kjobo jo qzpozhi pg ambby gwp jqi gnobmpqgzi tbgwcjp m zok hqsoziqgz pg pjo nbgioawpqgz gv pjo kmb.'

pjo lgii gv ocynp qz zqzopooz vgwbpy pkg kgwlh jmdo iop tmae pjo bo-agzuwoip gv zgbpj mvbqam mzh wniop pjo pqsopmtlo vgb pjo qzdmiqgz gv vbmzao. maagbhqzc pg jqziloy, gdoblgbh kgwlh nbgtmtly jmdo tooz hovobboh wzpql zqzopooz vgwbpy iqr.

twp ty pjoz pjo cobsmzi sqcjp jmdo jqp tmae kqpj d-komngzi mzh kgbio. ozqcsm iwaaoiioi mlkmyi zoohoh agsnlosozpqzc kqpj gpjob qzpollqcozao smpobqml, twp pjo vmap pjmp pjo mllqoi eonp ozqcsm ioabop wzpql zqzopooz iodozpy vgwb ijgki jgk swaj qp somzp pg pjos.

9, 3, zaxsgfqhqt gaf bds
hq mfksndsp qhqfgffq mxnsgp gbx gaf tfsjdqz ahg kdrv kp hqgsxynrhqt d qfb mxnsga baffc (jncghecphqt gaf qnjkfs xm zfgghqtz dqxgafs gbfqgp zhi ghjfz) hqgx gafhs qdudc fqhtjd jdrahqfz. gaf sfzncghqt 'qfg' bdz vqxbq gx gaf tfsjdqz dz 'gshgxq' dqy gx gaf kshghza dz 'zadsv'. mxs dcjxzg d pfds kcfgracfp rxncy jdvf qx hqsxdyz hqgx zadsv, dqy dcchfy cxzzfz hq gaf dgcdqghr dtdhq hqrsfdzfy dcdsjhqtcp.

hq yfrfjkfs qhqfgffq mxnsgp gbx zadsv bdz ksxvfq, kng tfsjdq hqqxudghxqz jfdqg gadg gaf dcchfz ady gx bdhg nqghc dntnzg gaf mxccxbhqt pfds kfmxsf qdudc fqhtjd bdz sftncdscp sfdy dtdhq. kp gafq gaf djfshrdqz bfsf drghuf rxjkdgdqgz, esxuhyhqt jnra-qffyfy rxjengfs exbfs gx kcfgracfp.

kp y-ydp hq onqf qhqfgffq mxnsgp mxns ncgsd bdz qx cxqtfs zx hjexsgdqg. kng zghcc qx xqf bdqgfy gaf tfsjdqz gx zfqzf gadg fqhtjd bdz kfhqt sfdy. bafq, d mfb ydpz kfmxsf gaf qxsjdqyp cdqyhqtz, dq djfshrdq gdzv mxsrf rdegnsfy d tfsjdq n-kxdg bhga hgz fqhtjd vfpz, dyjhsdc fsqfzg vhqt, nz rxjjdqyfs hq rahfm xm gaf dgcdqghr mcffg, gasfdgfqfy gx rxnsg-jdsghdc gaf xmmhrfs hq radstf mxs fqydqtfshqt 'xefsdghxq xufscxsy', dz gaf ecdq mxs gaf y-ydp cdqyhqtz bdz vqxbq.

kp axb jnra yhy ncgsd hqgfcchtfqrf, tdhqfy msxj sfdyhqt fqhtjd rheafsz, zaxsgfq gaf bds? adssp ahqzcfp, kdzfy dg kcfgracfp ynshqt gaf bds, znttfzgz hg bdz d zhtqhmhrdqg dzzfg. hm hg yhy qxg vffe sxjjfc xng xm ftpeg hq qhqfgffq mxnsgp xqf, hg rfsgdhqcp yhy zx gaf mxccxbhqt pfds, kp esfufqghqt ahj fiecxhghqt ahz uhrgxsp dg tdwdcd.

dz tfqfsdc dcfidqyfs eng hg, 'gaf vqxbcfytf qxg xqcp xm gaf fqfjp'z esfrhzf zgsfqtga dqy yhzexzhghxq, kng dczx axb, bafq dqy bafsf af hqgfqyz gx rdssp xng ahz xefsdghxqz ksxntag d qfb yhjfqzhxq gx gaf esxzfrnghxq xm gaf bds.'

gaf cxzz xm ftpeg hq qhqfgffq mxnsgp gbx bxncy aduf zfg kdrv gaf sf-rxqlnfzg xm qxsga dmshrd dqy nezfg gaf ghjfgdkcf mxs gaf hqudzhxq xm msdqrf. drrxsyhqt gx ahqzcfp, xufscxsy bxncy esxkdkcp aduf kffq yfmfssfy nqghc qhqfgffq mxnsgp zhi.

kng kp gafq gaf tfsjdqz jhtag aduf ahg kdrv bhga u-bfdexqz dqy bxszf. fqhtjd znrrfzzfz dcbdpz qffyfy rxjecfjfqghqt bhga xgafs hqgfcchtfqrf jdgfshdc, kng gaf mdrg gadg gaf dcchfz vfeg fqhtjd zfrsfg nqghc qhqfgffq zfufqgp mxns zaxbz axb jnra hg jfdqg gx gafj.

9, 4, qrojxwhyhk xrw suj
yh dwbjeujg hyhwxwwh doejxg xso xrw kwjauhq ryx buim bg yhxjopeiyhk u hws doejxr srwwt (aetxyvtgyhk xrw heabwj od qwxxyhkq uhoxrwj xswhxg qyz xyawq) yhxo xrwyj hulut whykau auiryhwq. xrw jwqetxyhk 'hwx' suq mhosh xo xrw kwjauhq uq 'xjyxoh' uhp xo xrw bjyxyqr uq 'qrujm'. doj utaoqx u gwuj btwxirtwg ioetp aumw ho yhjoupq yhxo qrujm, uhp uttywp toqqwq yh xrw uxtuhxyi ukuyh yhijwuqwp utujayhktg.

yh pwiwabwj hyhwxwwh doejxg xso qrujm suq bjomwh, bex kwjauh yhholuxyohq awuhx xrux xrw uttywq rup xo suyx ehxyt uekeqx xrw dottosyhk gwuj bwdojw hulut whykau suq jwketujtg jwup ukuyh. bg xrwh xrw uawjyiuhq swjw uixylw ioabuxuhxq, vjolypyhk aeir-hwwpwp ioavexwj voswj xo btwxirtwg.

bg p-pug yh fehw hyhwxwwh doejxg doej etxju suq ho tohkwj qo yavojxuhx. bex qxytt ho ohw suhxwp xrw kwjauhq xo qwhqw xrux whykau suq bwyhk jwup. srwh, u dws pugq bwdojw xrw hojauhpg tuhpyhkq, uh uawjyiuh xuqm dojiw iuvxejwp u kwjauh e-boux syxr yxq whykau mwgq, upayjut wjhwqx myhk, eq ioaauhpwj yh irywd od xrw uxtuhxyi dtwwx, xrjwuxwhwp xo ioejx-aujxyut xrw oddyiwj yh irujkw doj whpuhkwjyhk 'ovwjuxyoh olwjtojp', uq xrw vtuh doj xrw p-pug tuhpyhkq suq mhosh.

bg ros aeir pyp etxju yhxwttykwhiw, kuyhwp djoa jwupyhk whykau iyvrwjq, qrojxwh xrw suj? rujjg ryhqtwg, buqwp ux btwxirtwg pejyhk xrw suj, qekkwqxq yx suq u qykhydyiuhx uqqwx. yd yx pyp hox mwwv joaawt oex od wkgvx yh hyhwxwwh doejxg ohw, yx iwjxuyhtg pyp qo xrw dottosyhk gwuj, bg vjwlwhxyhk rya wzvtoyxyhk ryq lyixojg ux kunutu.

uq kwhwjut utwzuhpwj vex yx, 'xrw mhostwpkw hox ohtg od xrw whwag'q vjwiyqw qxjwhkxr uhp pyqvoqyxyoh, bex utqo ros, srwh uhp srwjw rw yhxwhpq xo iujjg oex ryq ovwjuxyohq bjoekrx u hws pyawhqyoh xo xrw vjoqwiexyoh od xrw suj.'

xrw toqq od wkgvx yh hyhwxwwh doejxg xso soetp rulw qwx buim xrw jw-iohcewqx od hojxr udjyiu uhp evqwx xrw xyawxubtw doj xrw yhluqyoh od djuhiw. uiiojpyhk xo ryhqtwg, olwjtojp soetp vjobubtg rulw bwwh pwdwjjwp ehxyt hyhwxwwh doejxg qyz.

bex bg xrwh xrw kwjauhq aykrx rulw ryx buim syxr l-swuvohq uhp sojqw. whykau qeiiwqqwq utsugq hwwpwp ioavtwawhxyhk syxr oxrwj yhxwttykwhiw auxwjyut, bex xrw duix xrux xrw uttywq mwvx whykau qwijwx ehxyt hyhwxwwh qwlwhxg doej qrosq ros aeir yx awuhx xo xrwa.

9, 5, hifaonypyb oin jla
py unsavlax ypynonny ufvaox ojf oin bnarlyh ipo slzd sx pyoafgvzpyb l ynj ufvaoi jinnk (rvkopmkxpyb oin yvrsna fu hnoopybh lyfoina ojnyox hpq oprnh) pyof oinpa ylclk nypbrl rlzipynh. oin anhvkopyb 'yno' jlh dyfjy of oin bnarlyh lh 'oapofy' lyg of oin sapophi lh 'hilad'. ufa lkrfho l xnla sknoziknx zfvkg rldn yf pyaflgh pyof hilad, lyg lkkpng kfhhnh py oin loklyopz lblpy pyzanlhng lklarpybkx.

py gnznrsna ypynonny ufvaox ojf hilad jlh safdny, svo bnarly pyyfclopfyh rnlyo oilo oin lkkpnh ilg of jlpo vyopk lvbvho oin ufkkfjpyb xnla snufan ylclk nypbrl jlh anbvklakx anlg lblpy. sx oiny oin lrnapzlyh jnan lzopcn zfrslolyoh, mafcpgpyb rvzi-ynngng zfrmvona mfjna of sknoziknx.

sx g-glx py wvyn ypynonny ufvaox ufva vkoal jlh yf kfybna hf prmfaolyo. svo hopkk yf fyn jlyong oin bnarlyh of hnyhn oilo nypbrl jlh snpyb anlg. jiny, l unj glxh snufan oin yfarlygx klygpybh, ly lrnapzly olhd ufazn zlmovang l bnarly v-sflo jpoi poh nypbrl dnxh, lgrpalk naynho dpyb, vh zfrrlygna py zipnu fu oin loklyopz uknno, oianlonyng of zfvao-rlaoplk oin fuupzna py zilabn ufa nyglybnapyb 'fmnalopfy fcnakfag', lh oin mkly ufa oin g-glx klygpybh jlh dyfjy.

sx ifj rvzi gpg vkoal pyonkkpbnyzn, blpyng uafr anlgpyb nypbrl zpminah, hifaony oin jla? ilaax ipyhknx, slhng lo sknoziknx gvapyb oin jla, hvbbnhoh po jlh l hpbypupzlyo lhhno. pu po gpg yfo dnnm afrrnk fvo fu nbxmo py ypynonny ufvaox fyn, po znaolpykx gpg hf oin ufkkfjpyb xnla, sx mancnyopyb ipr nqmkfpopyb iph cpzofax lo blelkl.

lh bnynalk lknqlygna mvo po, 'oin dyfjkngbn yfo fykx fu oin nynrx'h manzphn hoanyboi lyg gphmfhpopfy, svo lkhf ifj, jiny lyg jinan in pyonygh of zlaax fvo iph fmnalopfyh safvbio l ynj gprnyhpfy of oin mafhnzvopfy fu oin jla.'

oin kfhh fu nbxmo py ypynonny ufvaox ojf jfvkg ilcn hno slzd oin an-zfytvnho fu yfaoi luapzl lyg vmhno oin oprnolskn ufa oin pyclhpfy fu ualyzn. lzzfagpyb of ipyhknx, fcnakfag jfvkg mafslskx ilcn snny gnunaang vyopk ypynonny ufvaox hpq.

svo sx oiny oin bnarlyh rpbio ilcn ipo slzd jpoi c-jnlmfyh lyg jfahn. nypbrl hvzznhhnh lkjlxh ynngng zfrmknrnyopyb jpoi foina pyonkkpbnyzn rlonaplk, svo oin ulzo oilo oin lkkpnh dnmo nypbrl hnzano vyopk ypynonny hncnyox ufva hifjh ifj rvzi po rnlyo of oinr.

9, 6, yzwrfepgps fze acr
gp lejrmcro pgpefeep lwmrfo faw fze sericpy zgf jcqu jo gpfrwxmqgps c pea lwmrfz azeeb (imbfgdbogps fze pmijer wl yeffgpsy cpwfzer faepfo ygh fgiey) gpfw fzegr pctcb epgsic icqzgpey. fze reymbfgps 'pef' acy upwap fw fze sericpy cy 'frgfwp' cpx fw fze jrgfgyz cy 'yzcru'. lwr cbiwyf c oecr jbefqzbeo qwmbx icue pw gprwcxy gpfw yzcru, cpx cbbgex bwyyey gp fze cfbcpfgq cscgp gpqrecyex cbcrigpsbo.

gp xeqeijer pgpefeep lwmrfo faw yzcru acy jrwuep, jmf sericp gppwtcfgwpy iecpf fzcf fze cbbgey zcx fw acgf mpfgb cmsmyf fze lwbbwagps oecr jelwre pctcb epgsic acy resmbcrbo recx cscgp. jo fzep fze ciergqcpy aere cqfgte qwijcfcpfy, drwtgxgps imqz-peexex qwidmfer dwaer fw jbefqzbeo.

jo x-xco gp nmpe pgpefeep lwmrfo lwmr mbfrc acy pw bwpser yw gidwrfcpf. jmf yfgbb pw wpe acpfex fze sericpy fw yepye fzcf epgsic acy jegps recx. azep, c lea xcoy jelwre fze pwricpxo bcpxgpsy, cp ciergqcp fcyu lwrqe qcdfmrex c sericp m-jwcf agfz gfy epgsic ueoy, cxigrcb erpeyf ugps, my qwiicpxer gp qzgel wl fze cfbcpfgq lbeef, fzrecfepex fw qwmrf-icrfgcb fze wllgqer gp qzcrse lwr epxcpsergps 'wdercfgwp wterbwrx', cy fze dbcp lwr fze x-xco bcpxgpsy acy upwap.

jo zwa imqz xgx mbfrc gpfebbgsepqe, scgpex lrwi recxgps epgsic qgdzery, yzwrfep fze acr? zcrro zgpybeo, jcyex cf jbefqzbeo xmrgps fze acr, ymsseyfy gf acy c ygspglgqcpf cyyef. gl gf xgx pwf ueed rwiieb wmf wl esodf gp pgpefeep lwmrfo wpe, gf qerfcgpbo xgx yw fze lwbbwagps oecr, jo dretepfgps zgi ehdbwgfgps zgy tgqfwro cf scvcbc.

cy sepercb cbehcpxer dmf gf, 'fze upwabexse pwf wpbo wl fze epeio'y dreqgye yfrepsfz cpx xgydwygfgwp, jmf cbyw zwa, azep cpx azere ze gpfepxy fw qcrro wmf zgy wdercfgwpy jrwmszf c pea xgiepygwp fw fze drwyeqmfgwp wl fze acr.'

fze bwyy wl esodf gp pgpefeep lwmrfo faw awmbx zcte yef jcqu fze re-qwpkmeyf wl pwrfz clrgqc cpx mdyef fze fgiefcjbe lwr fze gptcygwp wl lrcpqe. cqqwrxgps fw zgpybeo, wterbwrx awmbx drwjcjbo zcte jeep xelerrex mpfgb pgpefeep lwmrfo ygh.

jmf jo fzep fze sericpy igszf zcte zgf jcqu agfz t-aecdwpy cpx awrye. epgsic ymqqeyyey cbacoy peexex qwidbeiepfgps agfz wfzer gpfebbgsepqe icfergcb, jmf fze lcqf fzcf fze cbbgey uedf epgsic yeqref mpfgb pgpefeep yetepfo lwmr yzway zwa imqz gf iecpf fw fzei.

9, 7, pqniwvgxgj wqv rti
xg cvaidtif gxgvwvvg cndiwf wrn wqv jviztgp qxw athl af xgwinodhxgj t gvr cndiwq rqvvs (zdswxusfxgj wqv gdzavi nc pvwwxgjp tgnwqvi wrvgwf pxy wxzvp) xgwn wqvxi gtkts vgxjzt zthqxgvp. wqv ivpdswxgj 'gvw' rtp lgnrg wn wqv jviztgp tp 'wixwng' tgo wn wqv aixwxpq tp 'pqtil'. cni tsznpw t fvti asvwhqsvf hndso ztlv gn xgintop xgwn pqtil, tgo tssxvo snppvp xg wqv twstgwxh tjtxg xghivtpvo tstizxgjsf.

xg ovhvzavi gxgvwvvg cndiwf wrn pqtil rtp ainlvg, adw jviztg xggnktwxngp zvtgw wqtw wqv tssxvp qto wn rtxw dgwxs tdjdpw wqv cnssnrxgj fvti avcniv gtkts vgxjzt rtp ivjdstisf ivto tjtxg. af wqvg wqv tzvixhtgp rviv thwxkv hnzatwtgwp, uinkxoxgj zdhq-gvvovo hnzudwvi unrvi wn asvwhqsvf.

af o-otf xg edgv gxgvwvvg cndiwf cndi dswit rtp gn sngjvi pn xzuniwtgw. adw pwxss gn ngv rtgwvo wqv jviztgp wn pvgpv wqtw vgxjzt rtp avxgj ivto. rqvg, t cvr otfp avcniv wqv gniztgof stgoxgjp, tg tzvixhtg wtpl cnihv htuwdivo t jviztg d-antw rxwq xwp vgxjzt lvfp, tozxits vigvpw lxgj, dp hnzztgovi xg hqxvc nc wqv twstgwxh csvvw, wqivtwvgvo wn hndiw-ztiwxts wqv nccxhvi xg hqtijv cni vgotgjvixgj 'nuvitwxng nkvisnio', tp wqv ustg cni wqv o-otf stgoxgjp rtp lgnrg.

af qnr zdhq oxo dswit xgwvssxjvghv, jtxgvo cinz ivtoxgj vgxjzt hxuqvip, pqniwvg wqv rti? qtiif qxgpsvf, atpvo tw asvwhqsvf odixgj wqv rti, pdjjvpwp xw rtp t pxjgxcxhtgw tppvw. xc xw oxo gnw lvvu inzzvs ndw nc vjfuw xg gxgvwvvg cndiwf ngv, xw hviwtxgsf oxo pn wqv cnssnrxgj fvti, af uivkvgwxgj qxz vyusnxwxgj qxp kxhwnif tw jtmtst.

tp jvgvits tsvytgovi udw xw, 'wqv lgnrsvojv gnw ngsf nc wqv vgvzf'p uivhxpv pwivgjwq tgo oxpunpxwxng, adw tspn qnr, rqvg tgo rqviv qv xgwvgop wn htiif ndw qxp nuvitwxngp aindjqw t gvr oxzvgpxng wn wqv uinpvhdwxng nc wqv rti.'

wqv snpp nc vjfuw xg gxgvwvvg cndiwf wrn rndso qtkv pvw athl wqv iv-hngbdvpw nc gniwq tcixht tgo dupvw wqv wxzvwtasv cni wqv xgktpxng nc citghv. thhnioxgj wn qxgpsvf, nkvisnio rndso uinatasf qtkv avvg ovcviivo dgwxs gxgvwvvg cndiwf pxy.

adw af wqvg wqv jviztgp zxjqw qtkv qxw athl rxwq k-rvtungp tgo rnipv. vgxjzt pdhhvppvp tsrtfp gvvovo hnzusvzvgwxgj rxwq nwqvi xgwvssxjvghv ztwvixts, adw wqv cthw wqtw wqv tssxvp lvuw vgxjzt pvhivw dgwxs gxgvwvvg pvkvgwf cndi pqnrp qnr zdhq xw zvtgw wn wqvz.

9, 8, gheznmxoxa nhm ikz
ox tmrzukzw xoxmnmmx teuznw nie nhm amzqkxg hon rkyc rw oxnzefuyoxa k xmi teuznh ihmmj (qujnoljwoxa nhm xuqrmz et gmnnoxag kxenhmz nimxnw gop noqmg) oxne nhmoz xkbkj mxoaqk qkyhoxmg. nhm zmgujnoxa 'xmn' ikg cxeix ne nhm amzqkxg kg 'nzonex' kxf ne nhm rzonogh kg 'ghkzc'. tez kjqegn k wmkz rjmnyhjmw yeujf qkcm xe oxzekfg oxne ghkzc, kxf kjjomf jeggmg ox nhm knjkxnoy kakox oxyzmkgmf kjkzqoxajw.

ox fmymqrmz xoxmnmmx teuznw nie ghkzc ikg rzecmx, run amzqkx oxxebknoexg qmkxn nhkn nhm kjjomg hkf ne ikon uxnoj kuaugn nhm tejjeioxa wmkz rmtezm xkbkj mxoaqk ikg zmaujkzjw zmkf kakox. rw nhmx nhm kqmzoykxg imzm kynobm yeqrknkxng, lzebofoxa quyh-xmmfmf yeqlunmz leimz ne rjmnyhjmw.

rw f-fkw ox vuxm xoxmnmmx teuznw teuz ujnzk ikg xe jexamz ge oqleznkxn. run gnojj xe exm ikxnmf nhm amzqkxg ne gmxgm nhkn mxoaqk ikg rmoxa zmkf. ihmx, k tmi fkwg rmtezm nhm xezqkxfw jkxfoxag, kx kqmzoykx nkgc tezym yklnuzmf k amzqkx u-rekn ionh ong mxoaqk cmwg, kfqozkj mzxmgn coxa, ug yeqqkxfmz ox yhomt et nhm knjkxnoy tjmmn, nhzmknmxmf ne yeuzn-qkznokj nhm ettoymz ox yhkzam tez mxfkxamzoxa 'elmzknoex ebmzjezf', kg nhm ljkx tez nhm f-fkw jkxfoxag ikg cxeix.

rw hei quyh fof ujnzk oxnmjjoamxym, akoxmf tzeq zmkfoxa mxoaqk yolhmzg, gheznmx nhm ikz? hkzzw hoxgjmw, rkgmf kn rjmnyhjmw fuzoxa nhm ikz, guaamgng on ikg k goaxotoykxn kggmn. ot on fof xen cmml zeqqmj eun et mawln ox xoxmnmmx teuznw exm, on ymznkoxjw fof ge nhm tejjeioxa wmkz, rw lzmbmxnoxa hoq mpljeonoxa hog boynezw kn akdkjk.

kg amxmzkj kjmpkxfmz lun on, 'nhm cxeijmfam xen exjw et nhm mxmqw'g lzmyogm gnzmxanh kxf foglegonoex, run kjge hei, ihmx kxf ihmzm hm oxnmxfg ne ykzzw eun hog elmzknoexg rzeuahn k xmi foqmxgoex ne nhm lzegmyunoex et nhm ikz.'

nhm jegg et mawln ox xoxmnmmx teuznw nie ieujf hkbm gmn rkyc nhm zm-yexsumgn et xeznh ktzoyk kxf ulgmn nhm noqmnkrjm tez nhm oxbkgoex et tzkxym. kyyezfoxa ne hoxgjmw, ebmzjezf ieujf lzerkrjw hkbm rmmx fmtmzzmf uxnoj xoxmnmmx teuznw gop.

run rw nhmx nhm amzqkxg qoahn hkbm hon rkyc ionh b-imklexg kxf iezgm. mxoaqk guyymggmg kjikwg xmmfmf yeqljmqmxnoxa ionh enhmz oxnmjjoamxym qknmzokj, run nhm tkyn nhkn nhm kjjomg cmln mxoaqk gmyzmn uxnoj xoxmnmmx gmbmxnw teuz gheig hei quyh on qmkxn ne nhmq.

9, 9, xyvqedofor eyd zbq
fo kdiqlbqn ofodeddo kvlqen ezv eyd rdqhbox yfe ibpt in foeqvwlpfor b odz kvlqey zydda (hlaefcanfor eyd olhidq vk xdeeforx boveydq ezdoen xfg efhdx) foev eydfq obsba dofrhb hbpyfodx. eyd qdxlaefor 'ode' zbx tovzo ev eyd rdqhbox bx 'eqfevo' bow ev eyd iqfefxy bx 'xybqt'. kvq bahvxe b ndbq iadepyadn pvlaw hbtd ov foqvbwx foev xybqt, bow baafdw avxxdx fo eyd beaboefp brbfo fopqdbxdw babqhforan.

fo wdpdhidq ofodeddo kvlqen ezv xybqt zbx iqvtdo, ile rdqhbo foovsbefvox hdboe eybe eyd baafdx ybw ev zbfe loefa blrlxe eyd kvaavzfor ndbq idkvqd obsba dofrhb zbx qdrlabqan qdbw brbfo. in eydo eyd bhdqfpbox zdqd bpefsd pvhibeboex, cqvsfwfor hlpy-oddwdw pvhcledq cvzdq ev iadepyadn.

in w-wbn fo mlod ofodeddo kvlqen kvlq laeqb zbx ov avordq xv fhcvqeboe. ile xefaa ov vod zboedw eyd rdqhbox ev xdoxd eybe dofrhb zbx idfor qdbw. zydo, b kdz wbnx idkvqd eyd ovqhbown abowforx, bo bhdqfpbo ebxt kvqpd pbcelqdw b rdqhbo l-ivbe zfey fex dofrhb tdnx, bwhfqba dqodxe tfor, lx pvhhbowdq fo pyfdk vk eyd beaboefp kadde, eyqdbedodw ev pvlqe-hbqefba eyd vkkfpdq fo pybqrd kvq dowbordqfor 'vcdqbefvo vsdqavqw', bx eyd cabo kvq eyd w-wbn abowforx zbx tovzo.

in yvz hlpy wfw laeqb foedaafrdopd, rbfodw kqvh qdbwfor dofrhb pfcydqx, xyvqedo eyd zbq? ybqqn yfoxadn, ibxdw be iadepyadn wlqfor eyd zbq, xlrrdxex fe zbx b xfrofkfpboe bxxde. fk fe wfw ove tddc qvhhda vle vk drnce fo ofodeddo kvlqen vod, fe pdqebfoan wfw xv eyd kvaavzfor ndbq, in cqdsdoefor yfh dgcavfefor yfx sfpevqn be rbubab.

bx rdodqba badgbowdq cle fe, 'eyd tovzadwrd ove voan vk eyd dodhn'x cqdpfxd xeqdorey bow wfxcvxfefvo, ile baxv yvz, zydo bow zydqd yd foedowx ev pbqqn vle yfx vcdqbefvox iqvlrye b odz wfhdoxfvo ev eyd cqvxdplefvo vk eyd zbq.'

eyd avxx vk drnce fo ofodeddo kvlqen ezv zvlaw ybsd xde ibpt eyd qd-pvojldxe vk ovqey bkqfpb bow lcxde eyd efhdebiad kvq eyd fosbxfvo vk kqbopd. bppvqwfor ev yfoxadn, vsdqavqw zvlaw cqvibian ybsd iddo wdkdqqdw loefa ofodeddo kvlqen xfg.

ile in eydo eyd rdqhbox hfrye ybsd yfe ibpt zfey s-zdbcvox bow zvqxd. dofrhb xlppdxxdx bazbnx oddwdw pvhcadhdoefor zfey veydq foedaafrdopd hbedqfba, ile eyd kbpe eybe eyd baafdx tdce dofrhb xdpqde loefa ofodeddo xdsdoen kvlq xyvzx yvz hlpy fe hdboe ev eydh.

9, 10, opmhvufwfi vpu qsh
wf buzhcshe fwfuvuuf bmchve vqm vpu iuhysfo pwv zsgk ze wfvhmncgwfi s fuq bmchvp qpuur (ycrvwtrewfi vpu fcyzuh mb ouvvwfio sfmvpuh vqufve owx vwyuo) wfvm vpuwh fsjsr ufwiys ysgpwfuo. vpu huocrvwfi 'fuv' qso kfmqf vm vpu iuhysfo so 'vhwvmf' sfn vm vpu zhwvwop so 'opshk'. bmh srymov s eush zruvgprue gmcrn ysku fm wfhmsno wfvm opshk, sfn srrwun rmoouo wf vpu svrsfvwg siswf wfghusoun srshywfire.

wf nuguyzuh fwfuvuuf bmchve vqm opshk qso zhmkuf, zcv iuhysf wffmjsvwmfo yusfv vpsv vpu srrwuo psn vm qswv cfvwr scicov vpu bmrrmqwfi eush zubmhu fsjsr ufwiys qso huicrshre husn siswf. ze vpuf vpu syuhwgsfo quhu sgvwju gmyzsvsfvo, thmjwnwfi ycgp-fuunun gmytcvuh tmquh vm zruvgprue.

ze n-nse wf dcfu fwfuvuuf bmchve bmch crvhs qso fm rmfiuh om wytmhvsfv. zcv ovwrr fm mfu qsfvun vpu iuhysfo vm oufou vpsv ufwiys qso zuwfi husn. qpuf, s buq nseo zubmhu vpu fmhysfne rsfnwfio, sf syuhwgsf vsok bmhgu gstvchun s iuhysf c-zmsv qwvp wvo ufwiys kueo, snywhsr uhfuov kwfi, co gmyysfnuh wf gpwub mb vpu svrsfvwg bruuv, vphusvufun vm gmchv-yshvwsr vpu mbbwguh wf gpshiu bmh ufnsfiuhwfi 'mtuhsvwmf mjuhrmhn', so vpu trsf bmh vpu n-nse rsfnwfio qso kfmqf.

ze pmq ycgp nwn crvhs wfvurrwiufgu, iswfun bhmy husnwfi ufwiys gwtpuho, opmhvuf vpu qsh? pshhe pwforue, zsoun sv zruvgprue nchwfi vpu qsh, ociiuovo wv qso s owifwbwgsfv soouv. wb wv nwn fmv kuut hmyyur mcv mb uietv wf fwfuvuuf bmchve mfu, wv guhvswfre nwn om vpu bmrrmqwfi eush, ze thujufvwfi pwy uxtrmwvwfi pwo jwgvmhe sv islsrs.

so iufuhsr sruxsfnuh tcv wv, 'vpu kfmqruniu fmv mfre mb vpu ufuye'o thugwou ovhufivp sfn nwotmowvwmf, zcv srom pmq, qpuf sfn qpuhu pu wfvufno vm gshhe mcv pwo mtuhsvwmfo zhmcipv s fuq nwyufowmf vm vpu thmougcvwmf mb vpu qsh.'

vpu rmoo mb uietv wf fwfuvuuf bmchve vqm qmcrn psju ouv zsgk vpu hu-gmfacuov mb fmhvp sbhwgs sfn ctouv vpu vwyuvszru bmh vpu wfjsowmf mb bhsfgu. sggmhnwfi vm pwforue, mjuhrmhn qmcrn thmzszre psju zuuf nubuhhun cfvwr fwfuvuuf bmchve owx.

zcv ze vpuf vpu iuhysfo ywipv psju pwv zsgk qwvp j-qustmfo sfn qmhou. ufwiys ocgguoouo srqseo fuunun gmytruyufvwfi qwvp mvpuh wfvurrwiufgu ysvuhwsr, zcv vpu bsgv vpsv vpu srrwuo kutv ufwiys oughuv cfvwr fwfuvuuf oujufve bmch opmqo pmq ycgp wv yusfv vm vpuy.

9, 11, fgdymlwnwz mgl hjy
nw slqytjyv wnwlmllw sdtymv mhd mgl zlypjwf gnm qjxb qv nwmydetxnwz j wlh sdtymg hglli (ptimnkivnwz mgl wtpqly ds flmmnwzf jwdmgly mhlwmv fno mnplf) nwmd mglny wjaji lwnzpj pjxgnwlf. mgl ylftimnwz 'wlm' hjf bwdhw md mgl zlypjwf jf 'mynmdw' jwe md mgl qynmnfg jf 'fgjyb'. sdy jipdfm j vljy qilmxgilv xdtie pjbl wd nwydjef nwmd fgjyb, jwe jiinle idfflf nw mgl jmijwmnx jzjnw nwxyljfle jijypnwziv.

nw elxlpqly wnwlmllw sdtymv mhd fgjyb hjf qydblw, qtm zlypjw nwwdajmndwf pljwm mgjm mgl jiinlf gje md hjnm twmni jtztfm mgl sdiidhnwz vljy qlsdyl wjaji lwnzpj hjf ylztijyiv ylje jzjnw. qv mglw mgl jplynxjwf hlyl jxmnal xdpqjmjwmf, kydanenwz ptxg-wllele xdpktmly kdhly md qilmxgilv.

qv e-ejv nw utwl wnwlmllw sdtymv sdty timyj hjf wd idwzly fd npkdymjwm. qtm fmnii wd dwl hjwmle mgl zlypjwf md flwfl mgjm lwnzpj hjf qlnwz ylje. hglw, j slh ejvf qlsdyl mgl wdypjwev ijwenwzf, jw jplynxjw mjfb sdyxl xjkmtyle j zlypjw t-qdjm hnmg nmf lwnzpj blvf, jepnyji lywlfm bnwz, tf xdppjwely nw xgnls ds mgl jmijwmnx sillm, mgyljmlwle md xdtym-pjymnji mgl dssnxly nw xgjyzl sdy lwejwzlynwz 'dklyjmndw dalyidye', jf mgl kijw sdy mgl e-ejv ijwenwzf hjf bwdhw.

qv gdh ptxg ene timyj nwmliinzlwxl, zjnwle sydp yljenwz lwnzpj xnkglyf, fgdymlw mgl hjy? gjyyv gnwfilv, qjfle jm qilmxgilv etynwz mgl hjy, ftzzlfmf nm hjf j fnzwnsnxjwm jfflm. ns nm ene wdm bllk ydppli dtm ds lzvkm nw wnwlmllw sdtymv dwl, nm xlymjnwiv ene fd mgl sdiidhnwz vljy, qv kylalwmnwz gnp lokidnmnwz gnf anxmdyv jm zjcjij.

jf zlwlyji jilojwely ktm nm, 'mgl bwdhilezl wdm dwiv ds mgl lwlpv'f kylxnfl fmylwzmg jwe enfkdfnmndw, qtm jifd gdh, hglw jwe hglyl gl nwmlwef md xjyyv dtm gnf dklyjmndwf qydtzgm j wlh enplwfndw md mgl kydflxtmndw ds mgl hjy.'

mgl idff ds lzvkm nw wnwlmllw sdtymv mhd hdtie gjal flm qjxb mgl yl-xdwrtlfm ds wdymg jsynxj jwe tkflm mgl mnplmjqil sdy mgl nwajfndw ds syjwxl. jxxdyenwz md gnwfilv, dalyidye hdtie kydqjqiv gjal qllw elslyyle twmni wnwlmllw sdtymv fno.

qtm qv mglw mgl zlypjwf pnzgm gjal gnm qjxb hnmg a-hljkdwf jwe hdyfl. lwnzpj ftxxlfflf jihjvf wllele xdpkilplwmnwz hnmg dmgly nwmliinzlwxl pjmlynji, qtm mgl sjxm mgjm mgl jiinlf blkm lwnzpj flxylm twmni wnwlmllw flalwmv sdty fgdhf gdh ptxg nm pljwm md mglp.

9, 12, wxupdcnenq dxc yap
en jchpkapm nencdccn jukpdm dyu dxc qcpganw xed haos hm endpuvkoenq a ncy jukpdx yxccz (gkzdebzmenq dxc nkghcp uj wcddenqw anudxcp dycndm wef degcw) endu dxcep naraz cneqga gaoxencw. dxc pcwkzdenq 'ncd' yaw snuyn du dxc qcpganw aw 'dpedun' anv du dxc hpedewx aw 'wxaps'. jup azguwd a mcap hzcdoxzcm oukzv gasc nu enpuavw endu wxaps, anv azzecv zuwwcw en dxc adzandeo aqaen enopcawcv azapgenqzm.

en vcocghcp nencdccn jukpdm dyu wxaps yaw hpuscn, hkd qcpgan ennuradeunw gcand dxad dxc azzecw xav du yaed kndez akqkwd dxc juzzuyenq mcap hcjupc naraz cneqga yaw pcqkzapzm pcav aqaen. hm dxcn dxc agcpeoanw ycpc aoderc oughadandw, bpurevenq gkox-nccvcv ougbkdcp buycp du hzcdoxzcm.

hm v-vam en lknc nencdccn jukpdm jukp kzdpa yaw nu zunqcp wu egbupdand. hkd wdezz nu unc yandcv dxc qcpganw du wcnwc dxad cneqga yaw hcenq pcav. yxcn, a jcy vamw hcjupc dxc nupganvm zanvenqw, an agcpeoan daws jupoc oabdkpcv a qcpgan k-huad yedx edw cneqga scmw, avgepaz cpncwd senq, kw ougganvcp en oxecj uj dxc adzandeo jzccd, dxpcadcncv du oukpd-gapdeaz dxc ujjeocp en oxapqc jup cnvanqcpenq 'ubcpadeun urcpzupv', aw dxc bzan jup dxc v-vam zanvenqw yaw snuyn.

hm xuy gkox vev kzdpa endczzeqcnoc, qaencv jpug pcavenq cneqga oebxcpw, wxupdcn dxc yap? xappm xenwzcm, hawcv ad hzcdoxzcm vkpenq dxc yap, wkqqcwdw ed yaw a weqnejeoand awwcd. ej ed vev nud sccb puggcz ukd uj cqmbd en nencdccn jukpdm unc, ed ocpdaenzm vev wu dxc juzzuyenq mcap, hm bpcrcndenq xeg cfbzuedenq xew reodupm ad qataza.

aw qcncpaz azcfanvcp bkd ed, 'dxc snuyzcvqc nud unzm uj dxc cncgm'w bpcoewc wdpcnqdx anv vewbuwedeun, hkd azwu xuy, yxcn anv yxcpc xc endcnvw du oappm ukd xew ubcpadeunw hpukqxd a ncy vegcnweun du dxc bpuwcokdeun uj dxc yap.'

dxc zuww uj cqmbd en nencdccn jukpdm dyu yukzv xarc wcd haos dxc pc-ounikcwd uj nupdx ajpeoa anv kbwcd dxc degcdahzc jup dxc enraweun uj jpanoc. aooupvenq du xenwzcm, urcpzupv yukzv bpuhahzm xarc hccn vcjcppcv kndez nencdccn jukpdm wef.

hkd hm dxcn dxc qcpganw geqxd xarc xed haos yedx r-ycabunw anv yupwc. cneqga wkoocwwcw azyamw nccvcv ougbzcgcndenq yedx udxcp endczzeqcnoc gadcpeaz, hkd dxc jaod dxad dxc azzecw scbd cneqga wcopcd kndez nencdccn wcrcndm jukp wxuyw xuy gkox ed gcand du dxcg.

9, 13, nolguteveh uot prg
ve atygbrgd evetutte albgud upl uot htgxren ovu yrfj yd veuglmbfveh r etp albguo pottq (xbquvsqdveh uot ebxytg la ntuuvehn reluotg upteud nvw uvxtn) veul uotvg erirq tevhxr xrfovetn. uot gtnbquveh 'etu' prn jelpe ul uot htgxren rn 'ugvule' rem ul uot ygvuvno rn 'norgj'. alg rqxlnu r dtrg yqtufoqtd flbqm xrjt el veglrmn veul norgj, rem rqqvtm qlnntn ve uot ruqreuvf rhrve vefgtrntm rqrgxvehqd.

ve mtftxytg evetutte albgud upl norgj prn ygljte, ybu htgxre veeliruvlen xtreu uoru uot rqqvtn orm ul prvu beuvq rbhbnu uot alqqlpveh dtrg ytalgt erirq tevhxr prn gthbqrgqd gtrm rhrve. yd uote uot rxtgvfren ptgt rfuvit flxyrureun, sglivmveh xbfo-ettmtm flxsbutg slptg ul yqtufoqtd.

yd m-mrd ve cbet evetutte albgud albg bqugr prn el qlehtg nl vxslgureu. ybu nuvqq el let preutm uot htgxren ul ntent uoru tevhxr prn ytveh gtrm. pote, r atp mrdn ytalgt uot elgxremd qremvehn, re rxtgvfre urnj algft frsubgtm r htgxre b-ylru pvuo vun tevhxr jtdn, rmxvgrq tgetnu jveh, bn flxxremtg ve fovta la uot ruqreuvf aqttu, uogtrutetm ul flbgu-xrguvrq uot laavftg ve forght alg temrehtgveh 'lstgruvle litgqlgm', rn uot sqre alg uot m-mrd qremvehn prn jelpe.

yd olp xbfo mvm bqugr veutqqvhteft, hrvetm aglx gtrmveh tevhxr fvsotgn, nolgute uot prg? orggd ovenqtd, yrntm ru yqtufoqtd mbgveh uot prg, nbhhtnun vu prn r nvhevavfreu rnntu. va vu mvm elu jtts glxxtq lbu la thdsu ve evetutte albgud let, vu ftgurveqd mvm nl uot alqqlpveh dtrg, yd sgtiteuveh ovx twsqlvuveh ovn ivfulgd ru hrkrqr.

rn htetgrq rqtwremtg sbu vu, 'uot jelpqtmht elu leqd la uot tetxd'n sgtfvnt nugtehuo rem mvnslnvuvle, ybu rqnl olp, pote rem potgt ot veutemn ul frggd lbu ovn lstgruvlen yglbhou r etp mvxtenvle ul uot sglntfbuvle la uot prg.'

uot qlnn la thdsu ve evetutte albgud upl plbqm orit ntu yrfj uot gt-flezbtnu la elguo ragvfr rem bsntu uot uvxturyqt alg uot veirnvle la agreft. rfflgmveh ul ovenqtd, litgqlgm plbqm sglyryqd orit ytte mtatggtm beuvq evetutte albgud nvw.

ybu yd uote uot htgxren xvhou orit ovu yrfj pvuo i-ptrslen rem plgnt. tevhxr nbfftnntn rqprdn ettmtm flxsqtxteuveh pvuo luotg veutqqvhteft xrutgvrq, ybu uot arfu uoru uot rqqvtn jtsu tevhxr ntfgtu beuvq evetutte ntiteud albg nolpn olp xbfo vu xtreu ul uotx.

9, 14, efcxlkvmvy lfk gix
mv rkpxsixu vmvklkkv rcsxlu lgc lfk ykxoive fml piwa pu mvlxcdswmvy i vkg rcsxlf gfkkh (oshlmjhumvy lfk vsopkx cr ekllmvye ivclfkx lgkvlu emn lmoke) mvlc lfkmx vizih kvmyoi oiwfmvke. lfk xkeshlmvy 'vkl' gie avcgv lc lfk ykxoive ie 'lxmlcv' ivd lc lfk pxmlmef ie 'efixa'. rcx ihocel i ukix phklwfhku wcshd oiak vc mvxcide mvlc efixa, ivd ihhmkd hceeke mv lfk ilhivlmw iyimv mvwxkiekd ihixomvyhu.

mv dkwkopkx vmvklkkv rcsxlu lgc efixa gie pxcakv, psl ykxoiv mvvczilmcve okivl lfil lfk ihhmke fid lc giml svlmh isysel lfk rchhcgmvy ukix pkrcxk vizih kvmyoi gie xkyshixhu xkid iyimv. pu lfkv lfk iokxmwive gkxk iwlmzk wcopilivle, jxczmdmvy oswf-vkkdkd wcojslkx jcgkx lc phklwfhku.

pu d-diu mv tsvk vmvklkkv rcsxlu rcsx shlxi gie vc hcvykx ec mojcxlivl. psl elmhh vc cvk givlkd lfk ykxoive lc ekvek lfil kvmyoi gie pkmvy xkid. gfkv, i rkg diue pkrcxk lfk vcxoivdu hivdmvye, iv iokxmwiv liea rcxwk wijlsxkd i ykxoiv s-pcil gmlf mle kvmyoi akue, idomxih kxvkel amvy, se wcooivdkx mv wfmkr cr lfk ilhivlmw rhkkl, lfxkilkvkd lc wcsxl-oixlmih lfk crrmwkx mv wfixyk rcx kvdivykxmvy 'cjkxilmcv czkxhcxd', ie lfk jhiv rcx lfk d-diu hivdmvye gie avcgv.

pu fcg oswf dmd shlxi mvlkhhmykvwk, yimvkd rxco xkidmvy kvmyoi wmjfkxe, efcxlkv lfk gix? fixxu fmvehku, piekd il phklwfhku dsxmvy lfk gix, esyykele ml gie i emyvmrmwivl ieekl. mr ml dmd vcl akkj xcookh csl cr kyujl mv vmvklkkv rcsxlu cvk, ml wkxlimvhu dmd ec lfk rchhcgmvy ukix, pu jxkzkvlmvy fmo knjhcmlmvy fme zmwlcxu il yibihi.

ie ykvkxih ihknivdkx jsl ml, 'lfk avcghkdyk vcl cvhu cr lfk kvkou'e jxkwmek elxkvylf ivd dmejcemlmcv, psl ihec fcg, gfkv ivd gfkxk fk mvlkvde lc wixxu csl fme cjkxilmcve pxcsyfl i vkg dmokvemcv lc lfk jxcekwslmcv cr lfk gix.'

lfk hcee cr kyujl mv vmvklkkv rcsxlu lgc gcshd fizk ekl piwa lfk xk-wcvqskel cr vcxlf irxmwi ivd sjekl lfk lmokliphk rcx lfk mvziemcv cr rxivwk. iwwcxdmvy lc fmvehku, czkxhcxd gcshd jxcpiphu fizk pkkv dkrkxxkd svlmh vmvklkkv rcsxlu emn.

psl pu lfkv lfk ykxoive omyfl fizk fml piwa gmlf z-gkijcve ivd gcxek. kvmyoi eswwkeeke ihgiue vkkdkd wcojhkokvlmvy gmlf clfkx mvlkhhmykvwk oilkxmih, psl lfk riwl lfil lfk ihhmke akjl kvmyoi ekwxkl svlmh vmvklkkv ekzkvlu rcsx efcge fcg oswf ml okivl lc lfko.

9, 15, vwtocbmdmp cwb xzo
dm ibgojzol mdmbcbbm itjocl cxt cwb pbofzmv wdc gznr gl dmcotujndmp z mbx itjocw xwbby (fjycdayldmp cwb mjfgbo ti vbccdmpv zmtcwbo cxbmcl vde cdfbv) dmct cwbdo mzqzy bmdpfz fznwdmbv. cwb obvjycdmp 'mbc' xzv rmtxm ct cwb pbofzmv zv 'codctm' zmu ct cwb godcdvw zv 'vwzor'. ito zyftvc z lbzo gybcnwybl ntjyu fzrb mt dmotzuv dmct vwzor, zmu zyydbu ytvvbv dm cwb zcyzmcdn zpzdm dmnobzvbu zyzofdmpyl.

dm ubnbfgbo mdmbcbbm itjocl cxt vwzor xzv gotrbm, gjc pbofzm dmmtqzcdtmv fbzmc cwzc cwb zyydbv wzu ct xzdc jmcdy zjpjvc cwb ityytxdmp lbzo gbitob mzqzy bmdpfz xzv obpjyzoyl obzu zpzdm. gl cwbm cwb zfbodnzmv xbob zncdqb ntfgzczmcv, aotqdudmp fjnw-mbbubu ntfajcbo atxbo ct gybcnwybl.

gl u-uzl dm kjmb mdmbcbbm itjocl itjo jycoz xzv mt ytmpbo vt dfatoczmc. gjc vcdyy mt tmb xzmcbu cwb pbofzmv ct vbmvb cwzc bmdpfz xzv gbdmp obzu. xwbm, z ibx uzlv gbitob cwb mtofzmul yzmudmpv, zm zfbodnzm czvr itonb nzacjobu z pbofzm j-gtzc xdcw dcv bmdpfz rblv, zufdozy bombvc rdmp, jv ntffzmubo dm nwdbi ti cwb zcyzmcdn iybbc, cwobzcbmbu ct ntjoc-fzocdzy cwb tiidnbo dm nwzopb ito bmuzmpbodmp 'tabozcdtm tqboytou', zv cwb ayzm ito cwb u-uzl yzmudmpv xzv rmtxm.

gl wtx fjnw udu jycoz dmcbyydpbmnb, pzdmbu iotf obzudmp bmdpfz ndawbov, vwtocbm cwb xzo? wzool wdmvybl, gzvbu zc gybcnwybl ujodmp cwb xzo, vjppbvcv dc xzv z vdpmdidnzmc zvvbc. di dc udu mtc rbba otffby tjc ti bplac dm mdmbcbbm itjocl tmb, dc nboczdmyl udu vt cwb ityytxdmp lbzo, gl aobqbmcdmp wdf beaytdcdmp wdv qdnctol zc pzszyz.

zv pbmbozy zybezmubo ajc dc, 'cwb rmtxybupb mtc tmyl ti cwb bmbfl'v aobndvb vcobmpcw zmu udvatvdcdtm, gjc zyvt wtx, xwbm zmu xwbob wb dmcbmuv ct nzool tjc wdv tabozcdtmv gotjpwc z mbx udfbmvdtm ct cwb aotvbnjcdtm ti cwb xzo.'

cwb ytvv ti bplac dm mdmbcbbm itjocl cxt xtjyu wzqb vbc gznr cwb ob-ntmhjbvc ti mtocw ziodnz zmu javbc cwb cdfbczgyb ito cwb dmqzvdtm ti iozmnb. znntoudmp ct wdmvybl, tqboytou xtjyu aotgzgyl wzqb gbbm ubiboobu jmcdy mdmbcbbm itjocl vde.

gjc gl cwbm cwb pbofzmv fdpwc wzqb wdc gznr xdcw q-xbzatmv zmu xtovb. bmdpfz vjnnbvvbv zyxzlv mbbubu ntfaybfbmcdmp xdcw tcwbo dmcbyydpbmnb fzcbodzy, gjc cwb iznc cwzc cwb zyydbv rbac bmdpfz vbnobc jmcdy mdmbcbbm vbqbmcl itjo vwtxv wtx fjnw dc fbzmc ct cwbf.

9, 16, mnkftsdudg tns oqf
ud zsxfaqfc dudstssd zkaftc tok tns gsfwqdm nut xqei xc udtfklaeudg q dso zkaftn onssp (wapturpcudg tns dawxsf kz msttudgm qdktnsf tosdtc muv tuwsm) udtk tnsuf dqhqp sdugwq wqenudsm. tns fsmaptudg 'dst' oqm idkod tk tns gsfwqdm qm 'tfutkd' qdl tk tns xfutumn qm 'mnqfi'. zkf qpwkmt q csqf xpstenpsc ekapl wqis dk udfkqlm udtk mnqfi, qdl qppusl pkmmsm ud tns qtpqdtue qgqud udefsqmsl qpqfwudgpc.

ud lseswxsf dudstssd zkaftc tok mnqfi oqm xfkisd, xat gsfwqd uddkhqtukdm wsqdt tnqt tns qppusm nql tk oqut adtup qagamt tns zkppkoudg csqf xszkfs dqhqp sdugwq oqm fsgapqfpc fsql qgqud. xc tnsd tns qwsfueqdm osfs qetuhs ekwxqtqdtm, rfkhuludg waen-dsslsl ekwratsf rkosf tk xpstenpsc.

xc l-lqc ud bads dudstssd zkaftc zkaf aptfq oqm dk pkdgsf mk uwrkftqdt. xat mtupp dk kds oqdtsl tns gsfwqdm tk msdms tnqt sdugwq oqm xsudg fsql. onsd, q zso lqcm xszkfs tns dkfwqdlc pqdludgm, qd qwsfueqd tqmi zkfes eqrtafsl q gsfwqd a-xkqt outn utm sdugwq iscm, qlwufqp sfdsmt iudg, am ekwwqdlsf ud enusz kz tns qtpqdtue zpsst, tnfsqtsdsl tk ekaft-wqftuqp tns kzzuesf ud enqfgs zkf sdlqdgsfudg 'krsfqtukd khsfpkfl', qm tns rpqd zkf tns l-lqc pqdludgm oqm idkod.

xc nko waen lul aptfq udtsppugsdes, gqudsl zfkw fsqludg sdugwq eurnsfm, mnkftsd tns oqf? nqffc nudmpsc, xqmsl qt xpstenpsc lafudg tns oqf, maggsmtm ut oqm q mugduzueqdt qmmst. uz ut lul dkt issr fkwwsp kat kz sgcrt ud dudstssd zkaftc kds, ut esftqudpc lul mk tns zkppkoudg csqf, xc rfshsdtudg nuw svrpkutudg num huetkfc qt gqjqpq.

qm gsdsfqp qpsvqdlsf rat ut, 'tns idkopslgs dkt kdpc kz tns sdswc'm rfseums mtfsdgtn qdl lumrkmutukd, xat qpmk nko, onsd qdl onsfs ns udtsdlm tk eqffc kat num krsfqtukdm xfkagnt q dso luwsdmukd tk tns rfkmseatukd kz tns oqf.'

tns pkmm kz sgcrt ud dudstssd zkaftc tok okapl nqhs mst xqei tns fs-ekdyasmt kz dkftn qzfueq qdl armst tns tuwstqxps zkf tns udhqmukd kz zfqdes. qeekfludg tk nudmpsc, khsfpkfl okapl rfkxqxpc nqhs xssd lszsffsl adtup dudstssd zkaftc muv.

xat xc tnsd tns gsfwqdm wugnt nqhs nut xqei outn h-osqrkdm qdl okfms. sdugwq maeesmmsm qpoqcm dsslsl ekwrpswsdtudg outn ktnsf udtsppugsdes wqtsfuqp, xat tns zqet tnqt tns qppusm isrt sdugwq msefst adtup dudstssd mshsdtc zkaf mnkom nko waen ut wsqdt tk tnsw.

9, 17, debwkjulux kej fhw
lu qjowrhwt ulujkjju qbrwkt kfb kej xjwnhud elk ohvz ot lukwbcrvlux h ujf qbrwke fejjg (nrgkligtlux kej urnojw bq djkkluxd hubkejw kfjukt dlm klnjd) lukb kejlw uhyhg julxnh nhvelujd. kej wjdrgklux 'ujk' fhd zubfu kb kej xjwnhud hd 'kwlkbu' huc kb kej owlklde hd 'dehwz'. qbw hgnbdk h tjhw ogjkvegjt vbrgc nhzj ub luwbhcd lukb dehwz, huc hggljc gbddjd lu kej hkghuklv hxhlu luvwjhdjc hghwnluxgt.

lu cjvjnojw ulujkjju qbrwkt kfb dehwz fhd owbzju, ork xjwnhu luubyhklbud njhuk kehk kej hggljd ehc kb fhlk ruklg hrxrdk kej qbggbflux tjhw ojqbwj uhyhg julxnh fhd wjxrghwgt wjhc hxhlu. ot keju kej hnjwlvhud fjwj hvklyj vbnohkhukd, iwbylclux nrve-ujjcjc vbnirkjw ibfjw kb ogjkvegjt.

ot c-cht lu sruj ulujkjju qbrwkt qbrw rgkwh fhd ub gbuxjw db lnibwkhuk. ork dklgg ub buj fhukjc kej xjwnhud kb djudj kehk julxnh fhd ojlux wjhc. feju, h qjf chtd ojqbwj kej ubwnhuct ghucluxd, hu hnjwlvhu khdz qbwvj vhikrwjc h xjwnhu r-obhk flke lkd julxnh zjtd, hcnlwhg jwujdk zlux, rd vbnnhucjw lu veljq bq kej hkghuklv qgjjk, kewjhkjujc kb vbrwk-nhwklhg kej bqqlvjw lu vehwxj qbw juchuxjwlux 'bijwhklbu byjwgbwc', hd kej ighu qbw kej c-cht ghucluxd fhd zubfu.

ot ebf nrve clc rgkwh lukjgglxjuvj, xhlujc qwbn wjhclux julxnh vliejwd, debwkju kej fhw? ehwwt eludgjt, ohdjc hk ogjkvegjt crwlux kej fhw, drxxjdkd lk fhd h dlxulqlvhuk hddjk. lq lk clc ubk zjji wbnnjg brk bq jxtik lu ulujkjju qbrwkt buj, lk vjwkhlugt clc db kej qbggbflux tjhw, ot iwjyjuklux eln jmigblklux eld ylvkbwt hk xhahgh.

hd xjujwhg hgjmhucjw irk lk, 'kej zubfgjcxj ubk bugt bq kej jujnt'd iwjvldj dkwjuxke huc cldibdlklbu, ork hgdb ebf, feju huc fejwj ej lukjucd kb vhwwt brk eld bijwhklbud owbrxek h ujf clnjudlbu kb kej iwbdjvrklbu bq kej fhw.'

kej gbdd bq jxtik lu ulujkjju qbrwkt kfb fbrgc ehyj djk ohvz kej wj-vbuprjdk bq ubwke hqwlvh huc ridjk kej klnjkhogj qbw kej luyhdlbu bq qwhuvj. hvvbwclux kb eludgjt, byjwgbwc fbrgc iwbohogt ehyj ojju cjqjwwjc ruklg ulujkjju qbrwkt dlm.

ork ot keju kej xjwnhud nlxek ehyj elk ohvz flke y-fjhibud huc fbwdj. julxnh drvvjddjd hgfhtd ujjcjc vbnigjnjuklux flke bkejw lukjgglxjuvj nhkjwlhg, ork kej qhvk kehk kej hggljd zjik julxnh djvwjk ruklg ulujkjju djyjukt qbrw debfd ebf nrve lk njhuk kb kejn.

9, 18, uvsnbalclo bva wyn
cl hafniynk lclabaal hsinbk bws bva oaneylu vcb fymq fk clbnstimclo y law hsinbv wvaax (eixbczxkclo bva liefan sh uabbclou ylsbvan bwalbk ucd bceau) clbs bvacn lypyx alcoey eymvclau. bva nauixbclo 'lab' wyu qlswl bs bva oaneylu yu 'bncbsl' ylt bs bva fncbcuv yu 'uvynq'. hsn yxesub y kayn fxabmvxak msixt eyqa ls clnsytu clbs uvynq, ylt yxxcat xsuuau cl bva ybxylbcm yoycl clmnayuat yxynecloxk.

cl tamaefan lclabaal hsinbk bws uvynq wyu fnsqal, fib oaneyl cllspybcslu eaylb bvyb bva yxxcau vyt bs wycb ilbcx yioiub bva hsxxswclo kayn fahsna lypyx alcoey wyu naoixynxk nayt yoycl. fk bval bva yeancmylu wana ymbcpa msefybylbu, znspctclo eimv-laatat mseziban zswan bs fxabmvxak.

fk t-tyk cl jila lclabaal hsinbk hsin ixbny wyu ls xsloan us cezsnbylb. fib ubcxx ls sla wylbat bva oaneylu bs ualua bvyb alcoey wyu faclo nayt. wval, y haw tyku fahsna bva lsneyltk xyltclou, yl yeancmyl byuq hsnma myzbinat y oaneyl i-fsyb wcbv cbu alcoey qaku, ytecnyx anlaub qclo, iu mseeyltan cl mvcah sh bva ybxylbcm hxaab, bvnaybalat bs msinb-eynbcyx bva shhcman cl mvynoa hsn altyloanclo 'szanybcsl spanxsnt', yu bva zxyl hsn bva t-tyk xyltclou wyu qlswl.

fk vsw eimv tct ixbny clbaxxcoalma, oyclat hnse naytclo alcoey mczvanu, uvsnbal bva wyn? vynnk vcluxak, fyuat yb fxabmvxak tinclo bva wyn, uiooaubu cb wyu y ucolchcmylb yuuab. ch cb tct lsb qaaz nseeax sib sh aokzb cl lclabaal hsinbk sla, cb manbyclxk tct us bva hsxxswclo kayn, fk znapalbclo vce adzxscbclo vcu pcmbsnk yb oyryxy.

yu oalanyx yxadyltan zib cb, 'bva qlswxatoa lsb slxk sh bva alaek'u znamcua ubnalobv ylt tcuzsucbcsl, fib yxus vsw, wval ylt wvana va clbaltu bs mynnk sib vcu szanybcslu fnsiovb y law tcealucsl bs bva znsuamibcsl sh bva wyn.'

bva xsuu sh aokzb cl lclabaal hsinbk bws wsixt vypa uab fymq bva na-mslgiaub sh lsnbv yhncmy ylt izuab bva bceabyfxa hsn bva clpyucsl sh hnylma. ymmsntclo bs vcluxak, spanxsnt wsixt znsfyfxk vypa faal tahannat ilbcx lclabaal hsinbk ucd.

fib fk bval bva oaneylu ecovb vypa vcb fymq wcbv p-wayzslu ylt wsnua. alcoey uimmauuau yxwyku laatat msezxaealbclo wcbv sbvan clbaxxcoalma eybancyx, fib bva hymb bvyb bva yxxcau qazb alcoey uamnab ilbcx lclabaal uapalbk hsin uvswu vsw eimv cb eaylb bs bvae.

9, 19, lmjesrctcf smr npe
tc yrwezpeb ctcrsrrc yjzesb snj smr frevpcl mts wpdh wb tcsejkzdtcf p crn yjzesm nmrro (vzostqobtcf smr czvwre jy lrsstcfl pcjsmre snrcsb ltu stvrl) tcsj smrte cpgpo rctfvp vpdmtcrl. smr erlzostcf 'crs' npl hcjnc sj smr frevpcl pl 'setsjc' pck sj smr wetstlm pl 'lmpeh'. yje povjls p brpe worsdmorb djzok vphr cj tcejpkl tcsj lmpeh, pck pootrk ojllrl tc smr psopcstd pfptc tcderplrk popevtcfob.

tc krdrvwre ctcrsrrc yjzesb snj lmpeh npl wejhrc, wzs frevpc tccjgpstjcl vrpcs smps smr pootrl mpk sj npts zcsto pzfzls smr yjoojntcf brpe wryjer cpgpo rctfvp npl erfzopeob erpk pfptc. wb smrc smr pvretdpcl nrer pdstgr djvwpspcsl, qejgtktcf vzdm-crrkrk djvqzsre qjnre sj worsdmorb.

wb k-kpb tc azcr ctcrsrrc yjzesb yjze zosep npl cj ojcfre lj tvqjespcs. wzs lstoo cj jcr npcsrk smr frevpcl sj lrclr smps rctfvp npl wrtcf erpk. nmrc, p yrn kpbl wryjer smr cjevpckb opcktcfl, pc pvretdpc splh yjedr dpqszerk p frevpc z-wjps ntsm tsl rctfvp hrbl, pkvtepo recrls htcf, zl djvvpckre tc dmtry jy smr psopcstd yorrs, smerpsrcrk sj djzes-vpestpo smr jyytdre tc dmpefr yje rckpcfretcf 'jqrepstjc jgreojek', pl smr qopc yje smr k-kpb opcktcfl npl hcjnc.

wb mjn vzdm ktk zosep tcsrootfrcdr, fptcrk yejv erpktcf rctfvp dtqmrel, lmjesrc smr npe? mpeeb mtclorb, wplrk ps worsdmorb kzetcf smr npe, lzffrlsl ts npl p ltfctytdpcs pllrs. ty ts ktk cjs hrrq ejvvro jzs jy rfbqs tc ctcrsrrc yjzesb jcr, ts dresptcob ktk lj smr yjoojntcf brpe, wb qergrcstcf mtv ruqojtstcf mtl gtdsjeb ps fpipop.

pl frcrepo porupckre qzs ts, 'smr hcjnorkfr cjs jcob jy smr rcrvb'l qerdtlr lsercfsm pck ktlqjltstjc, wzs polj mjn, nmrc pck nmrer mr tcsrckl sj dpeeb jzs mtl jqrepstjcl wejzfms p crn ktvrcltjc sj smr qejlrdzstjc jy smr npe.'

smr ojll jy rfbqs tc ctcrsrrc yjzesb snj njzok mpgr lrs wpdh smr er-djcxzrls jy cjesm pyetdp pck zqlrs smr stvrspwor yje smr tcgpltjc jy yepcdr. pddjektcf sj mtclorb, jgreojek njzok qejwpwob mpgr wrrc kryreerk zcsto ctcrsrrc yjzesb ltu.

wzs wb smrc smr frevpcl vtfms mpgr mts wpdh ntsm g-nrpqjcl pck njelr. rctfvp lzddrllrl ponpbl crrkrk djvqorvrcstcf ntsm jsmre tcsrootfrcdr vpsretpo, wzs smr ypds smps smr pootrl hrqs rctfvp lrders zcsto ctcrsrrc lrgrcsb yjze lmjnl mjn vzdm ts vrpcs sj smrv.

9, 20, cdavjitktw jdi egv
kt pinvqgvs tktijiit paqvjs jea jdi wivmgtc dkj nguy ns ktjvabquktw g tie paqvjd ediif (mqfjkhfsktw jdi tqmniv ap cijjktwc gtajdiv jeitjs ckl jkmic) ktja jdikv tgxgf itkwmg mgudktic. jdi vicqfjktw 'tij' egc ytaet ja jdi wivmgtc gc 'jvkjat' gtb ja jdi nvkjkcd gc 'cdgvy'. pav gfmacj g sigv nfijudfis uaqfb mgyi ta ktvagbc ktja cdgvy, gtb gffkib faccic kt jdi gjfgtjku gwgkt ktuvigcib gfgvmktwfs.

kt biuimniv tktijiit paqvjs jea cdgvy egc nvayit, nqj wivmgt kttaxgjkatc migtj jdgj jdi gffkic dgb ja egkj qtjkf gqwqcj jdi paffaektw sigv nipavi tgxgf itkwmg egc viwqfgvfs vigb gwgkt. ns jdit jdi gmivkugtc eivi gujkxi uamngjgtjc, hvaxkbktw mqud-tiibib uamhqjiv haeiv ja nfijudfis.

ns b-bgs kt rqti tktijiit paqvjs paqv qfjvg egc ta fatwiv ca kmhavjgtj. nqj cjkff ta ati egtjib jdi wivmgtc ja citci jdgj itkwmg egc niktw vigb. edit, g pie bgsc nipavi jdi tavmgtbs fgtbktwc, gt gmivkugt jgcy pavui ughjqvib g wivmgt q-nagj ekjd kjc itkwmg yisc, gbmkvgf ivticj yktw, qc uammgtbiv kt udkip ap jdi gjfgtjku pfiij, jdvigjitib ja uaqvj-mgvjkgf jdi appkuiv kt udgvwi pav itbgtwivktw 'ahivgjkat axivfavb', gc jdi hfgt pav jdi b-bgs fgtbktwc egc ytaet.

ns dae mqud bkb qfjvg ktjiffkwitui, wgktib pvam vigbktw itkwmg ukhdivc, cdavjit jdi egv? dgvvs dktcfis, ngcib gj nfijudfis bqvktw jdi egv, cqwwicjc kj egc g ckwtkpkugtj gccij. kp kj bkb taj yiih vammif aqj ap iwshj kt tktijiit paqvjs ati, kj uivjgktfs bkb ca jdi paffaektw sigv, ns hvixitjktw dkm ilhfakjktw dkc xkujavs gj wgzgfg.

gc witivgf gfilgtbiv hqj kj, 'jdi ytaefibwi taj atfs ap jdi itims'c hviukci cjvitwjd gtb bkchackjkat, nqj gfca dae, edit gtb edivi di ktjitbc ja ugvvs aqj dkc ahivgjkatc nvaqwdj g tie bkmitckat ja jdi hvaciuqjkat ap jdi egv.'

jdi facc ap iwshj kt tktijiit paqvjs jea eaqfb dgxi cij nguy jdi vi-uatoqicj ap tavjd gpvkug gtb qhcij jdi jkmijgnfi pav jdi ktxgckat ap pvgtui. guuavbktw ja dktcfis, axivfavb eaqfb hvangnfs dgxi niit bipivvib qtjkf tktijiit paqvjs ckl.

nqj ns jdit jdi wivmgtc mkwdj dgxi dkj nguy ekjd x-eighatc gtb eavci. itkwmg cquuiccic gfegsc tiibib uamhfimitjktw ekjd ajdiv ktjiffkwitui mgjivkgf, nqj jdi pguj jdgj jdi gffkic yihj itkwmg ciuvij qtjkf tktijiit cixitjs paqv cdaec dae mqud kj migtj ja jdim.

9, 21, turmazkbkn auz vxm
bk gzemhxmj kbkzazzk grhmaj avr auz nzmdxkt uba exlp ej bkamrshlbkn x kzv grhmau vuzzw (dhwabywjbkn auz khdezm rg tzaabknt xkrauzm avzkaj tbc abdzt) bkar auzbm kxoxw zkbndx dxlubkzt. auz mzthwabkn 'kza' vxt pkrvk ar auz nzmdxkt xt 'ambark' xks ar auz embabtu xt 'tuxmp'. grm xwdrta x jzxm ewzaluwzj lrhws dxpz kr bkmrxst bkar tuxmp, xks xwwbzs wrttzt bk auz xawxkabl xnxbk bklmzxtzs xwxmdbknwj.

bk szlzdezm kbkzazzk grhmaj avr tuxmp vxt emrpzk, eha nzmdxk bkkroxabrkt dzxka auxa auz xwwbzt uxs ar vxba hkabw xhnhta auz grwwrvbkn jzxm ezgrmz kxoxw zkbndx vxt mznhwxmwj mzxs xnxbk. ej auzk auz xdzmblxkt vzmz xlaboz lrdexaxkat, ymrobsbkn dhlu-kzzszs lrdyhazm yrvzm ar ewzaluwzj.

ej s-sxj bk ihkz kbkzazzk grhmaj grhm hwamx vxt kr wrknzm tr bdyrmaxka. eha tabww kr rkz vxkazs auz nzmdxkt ar tzktz auxa zkbndx vxt ezbkn mzxs. vuzk, x gzv sxjt ezgrmz auz krmdxksj wxksbknt, xk xdzmblxk axtp grmlz lxyahmzs x nzmdxk h-erxa vbau bat zkbndx pzjt, xsdbmxw zmkzta pbkn, ht lrddxkszm bk lubzg rg auz xawxkabl gwzza, aumzxazkzs ar lrhma-dxmabxw auz rggblzm bk luxmnz grm zksxknzmbkn 'ryzmxabrk rozmwrms', xt auz ywxk grm auz s-sxj wxksbknt vxt pkrvk.

ej urv dhlu sbs hwamx bkazwwbnzklz, nxbkzs gmrd mzxsbkn zkbndx lbyuzmt, turmazk auz vxm? uxmmj ubktwzj, extzs xa ewzaluwzj shmbkn auz vxm, thnnztat ba vxt x tbnkbgblxka xttza. bg ba sbs kra pzzy mrddzw rha rg znjya bk kbkzazzk grhmaj rkz, ba lzmaxbkwj sbs tr auz grwwrvbkn jzxm, ej ymzozkabkn ubd zcywrbabkn ubt oblarmj xa nxqxwx.

xt nzkzmxw xwzcxkszm yha ba, 'auz pkrvwzsnz kra rkwj rg auz zkzdj't ymzlbtz tamzknau xks sbtyrtbabrk, eha xwtr urv, vuzk xks vuzmz uz bkazkst ar lxmmj rha ubt ryzmxabrkt emrhnua x kzv sbdzktbrk ar auz ymrtzlhabrk rg auz vxm.'

auz wrtt rg znjya bk kbkzazzk grhmaj avr vrhws uxoz tza exlp auz mz-lrkfhzta rg krmau xgmblx xks hytza auz abdzaxewz grm auz bkoxtbrk rg gmxklz. xllrmsbkn ar ubktwzj, rozmwrms vrhws ymrexewj uxoz ezzk szgzmmzs hkabw kbkzazzk grhmaj tbc.

eha ej auzk auz nzmdxkt dbnua uxoz uba exlp vbau o-vzxyrkt xks vrmtz. zkbndx thllzttzt xwvxjt kzzszs lrdywzdzkabkn vbau rauzm bkazwwbnzklz dxazmbxw, eha auz gxla auxa auz xwwbzt pzya zkbndx tzlmza hkabw kbkzazzk tzozkaj grhm turvt urv dhlu ba dzxka ar auzd.

9, 22, klidrqbsbe rlq mod
sb xqvdyoda bsbqrqqb xiydra rmi rlq eqduobk lsr vocg va sbrdijycsbe o bqm xiydrl mlqqn (uynrspnasbe rlq byuvqd ix kqrrsbek obirlqd rmqbra kst rsuqk) sbri rlqsd bofon qbseuo uoclsbqk. rlq dqkynrsbe 'bqr' mok gbimb ri rlq eqduobk ok 'rdsrib' obj ri rlq vdsrskl ok 'klodg'. xid onuikr o aqod vnqrclnqa ciynj uogq bi sbdiojk sbri klodg, obj onnsqj nikkqk sb rlq ornobrsc oeosb sbcdqokqj onodusbena.

sb jqcquvqd bsbqrqqb xiydra rmi klodg mok vdigqb, vyr eqduob sbbiforsibk uqobr rlor rlq onnsqk loj ri mosr ybrsn oyeykr rlq xinnimsbe aqod vqxidq bofon qbseuo mok dqeynodna dqoj oeosb. va rlqb rlq ouqdscobk mqdq ocrsfq ciuvorobrk, pdifsjsbe uycl-bqqjqj ciupyrqd pimqd ri vnqrclnqa.

va j-joa sb zybq bsbqrqqb xiydra xiyd ynrdo mok bi nibeqd ki supidrobr. vyr krsnn bi ibq mobrqj rlq eqduobk ri kqbkq rlor qbseuo mok vqsbe dqoj. mlqb, o xqm joak vqxidq rlq biduobja nobjsbek, ob ouqdscob rokg xidcq coprydqj o eqduob y-vior msrl srk qbseuo gqak, ojusdon qdbqkr gsbe, yk ciuuobjqd sb clsqx ix rlq ornobrsc xnqqr, rldqorqbqj ri ciydr-uodrson rlq ixxscqd sb clodeq xid qbjobeqdsbe 'ipqdorsib ifqdnidj', ok rlq pnob xid rlq j-joa nobjsbek mok gbimb.

va lim uycl jsj ynrdo sbrqnnseqbcq, eosbqj xdiu dqojsbe qbseuo csplqdk, klidrqb rlq mod? lodda lsbknqa, vokqj or vnqrclnqa jydsbe rlq mod, kyeeqkrk sr mok o ksebsxscobr okkqr. sx sr jsj bir gqqp diuuqn iyr ix qeapr sb bsbqrqqb xiydra ibq, sr cqdrosbna jsj ki rlq xinnimsbe aqod, va pdqfqbrsbe lsu qtpnisrsbe lsk fscrida or eohono.

ok eqbqdon onqtobjqd pyr sr, 'rlq gbimnqjeq bir ibna ix rlq qbqua'k pdqcskq krdqberl obj jskpiksrsib, vyr onki lim, mlqb obj mlqdq lq sbrqbjk ri codda iyr lsk ipqdorsibk vdiyelr o bqm jsuqbksib ri rlq pdikqcyrsib ix rlq mod.'

rlq nikk ix qeapr sb bsbqrqqb xiydra rmi miynj lofq kqr vocg rlq dq-cibwyqkr ix bidrl oxdsco obj ypkqr rlq rsuqrovnq xid rlq sbfoksib ix xdobcq. occidjsbe ri lsbknqa, ifqdnidj miynj pdivovna lofq vqqb jqxqddqj ybrsn bsbqrqqb xiydra kst.

vyr va rlqb rlq eqduobk uselr lofq lsr vocg msrl f-mqopibk obj midkq. qbseuo kyccqkkqk onmoak bqqjqj ciupnquqbrsbe msrl irlqd sbrqnnseqbcq uorqdson, vyr rlq xocr rlor rlq onnsqk gqpr qbseuo kqcdqr ybrsn bsbqrqqb kqfqbra xiyd klimk lim uycl sr uqobr ri rlqu.

9, 23, bczuihsjsv ich dfu
js ohmupfur sjshihhs ozpuir idz ich vhulfsb cji mftx mr jsiuzaptjsv f shd ozpuic dchhe (lpeijgerjsv ich splmhu zo bhiijsvb fszichu idhsir bjk ijlhb) jsiz ichju sfwfe hsjvlf lftcjshb. ich uhbpeijsv 'shi' dfb xszds iz ich vhulfsb fb 'iujizs' fsa iz ich mujijbc fb 'bcfux'. ozu felzbi f rhfu mehitcehr tzpea lfxh sz jsuzfab jsiz bcfux, fsa feejha ezbbhb js ich fiefsijt fvfjs jstuhfbha fefuljsver.

js ahthlmhu sjshihhs ozpuir idz bcfux dfb muzxhs, mpi vhulfs jsszwfijzsb lhfsi icfi ich feejhb cfa iz dfji psije fpvpbi ich ozeezdjsv rhfu mhozuh sfwfe hsjvlf dfb uhvpefuer uhfa fvfjs. mr ichs ich flhujtfsb dhuh ftijwh tzlmfifsib, guzwjajsv lptc-shhaha tzlgpihu gzdhu iz mehitcehr.

mr a-afr js qpsh sjshihhs ozpuir ozpu peiuf dfb sz ezsvhu bz jlgzuifsi. mpi bijee sz zsh dfsiha ich vhulfsb iz bhsbh icfi hsjvlf dfb mhjsv uhfa. dchs, f ohd afrb mhozuh ich szulfsar efsajsvb, fs flhujtfs ifbx ozuth tfgipuha f vhulfs p-mzfi djic jib hsjvlf xhrb, faljufe hushbi xjsv, pb tzllfsahu js tcjho zo ich fiefsijt oehhi, icuhfihsha iz tzpui-lfuijfe ich zoojthu js tcfuvh ozu hsafsvhujsv 'zghufijzs zwhuezua', fb ich gefs ozu ich a-afr efsajsvb dfb xszds.

mr czd lptc aja peiuf jsiheejvhsth, vfjsha ouzl uhfajsv hsjvlf tjgchub, bczuihs ich dfu? cfuur cjsbehr, mfbha fi mehitcehr apujsv ich dfu, bpvvhbib ji dfb f bjvsjojtfsi fbbhi. jo ji aja szi xhhg uzllhe zpi zo hvrgi js sjshihhs ozpuir zsh, ji thuifjser aja bz ich ozeezdjsv rhfu, mr guhwhsijsv cjl hkgezjijsv cjb wjtizur fi vfyfef.

fb vhshufe fehkfsahu gpi ji, 'ich xszdehavh szi zser zo ich hshlr'b guhtjbh biuhsvic fsa ajbgzbjijzs, mpi febz czd, dchs fsa dchuh ch jsihsab iz tfuur zpi cjb zghufijzsb muzpvci f shd ajlhsbjzs iz ich guzbhtpijzs zo ich dfu.'

ich ezbb zo hvrgi js sjshihhs ozpuir idz dzpea cfwh bhi mftx ich uh-tzsnphbi zo szuic foujtf fsa pgbhi ich ijlhifmeh ozu ich jswfbjzs zo oufsth. fttzuajsv iz cjsbehr, zwhuezua dzpea guzmfmer cfwh mhhs ahohuuha psije sjshihhs ozpuir bjk.

mpi mr ichs ich vhulfsb ljvci cfwh cji mftx djic w-dhfgzsb fsa dzubh. hsjvlf bptthbbhb fedfrb shhaha tzlgehlhsijsv djic zichu jsiheejvhsth lfihujfe, mpi ich ofti icfi ich feejhb xhgi hsjvlf bhtuhi psije sjshihhs bhwhsir ozpu bczdb czd lptc ji lhfsi iz ichl.

9, 24, stqlzyjajm zty uwl
aj fydlgwli jajyzyyj fqglzi zuq zty mylcwjs taz dwko di ajzlqrgkajm w jyu fqglzt utyyv (cgvzaxviajm zty jgcdyl qf syzzajms wjqztyl zuyjzi sab zacys) ajzq ztyal jwnwv yjamcw cwktajys. zty lysgvzajm 'jyz' uws ojquj zq zty mylcwjs ws 'zlazqj' wjr zq zty dlazast ws 'stwlo'. fql wvcqsz w iywl dvyzktvyi kqgvr cwoy jq ajlqwrs ajzq stwlo, wjr wvvayr vqssys aj zty wzvwjzak wmwaj ajklywsyr wvwlcajmvi.

aj rykycdyl jajyzyyj fqglzi zuq stwlo uws dlqoyj, dgz mylcwj ajjqnwzaqjs cywjz ztwz zty wvvays twr zq uwaz gjzav wgmgsz zty fqvvquajm iywl dyfqly jwnwv yjamcw uws lymgvwlvi lywr wmwaj. di ztyj zty wcylakwjs uyly wkzany kqcdwzwjzs, xlqnarajm cgkt-jyyryr kqcxgzyl xquyl zq dvyzktvyi.

di r-rwi aj hgjy jajyzyyj fqglzi fqgl gvzlw uws jq vqjmyl sq acxqlzwjz. dgz szavv jq qjy uwjzyr zty mylcwjs zq syjsy ztwz yjamcw uws dyajm lywr. utyj, w fyu rwis dyfqly zty jqlcwjri vwjrajms, wj wcylakwj zwso fqlky kwxzglyr w mylcwj g-dqwz uazt azs yjamcw oyis, wrcalwv yljysz oajm, gs kqccwjryl aj ktayf qf zty wzvwjzak fvyyz, ztlywzyjyr zq kqglz-cwlzawv zty qffakyl aj ktwlmy fql yjrwjmylajm 'qxylwzaqj qnylvqlr', ws zty xvwj fql zty r-rwi vwjrajms uws ojquj.

di tqu cgkt rar gvzlw ajzyvvamyjky, mwajyr flqc lywrajm yjamcw kaxtyls, stqlzyj zty uwl? twlli tajsvyi, dwsyr wz dvyzktvyi rglajm zty uwl, sgmmyszs az uws w samjafakwjz wssyz. af az rar jqz oyyx lqccyv qgz qf ymixz aj jajyzyyj fqglzi qjy, az kylzwajvi rar sq zty fqvvquajm iywl, di xlynyjzajm tac ybxvqazajm tas nakzqli wz mwpwvw.

ws myjylwv wvybwjryl xgz az, 'zty ojquvyrmy jqz qjvi qf zty yjyci's xlykasy szlyjmzt wjr rasxqsazaqj, dgz wvsq tqu, utyj wjr utyly ty ajzyjrs zq kwlli qgz tas qxylwzaqjs dlqgmtz w jyu racyjsaqj zq zty xlqsykgzaqj qf zty uwl.'

zty vqss qf ymixz aj jajyzyyj fqglzi zuq uqgvr twny syz dwko zty ly-kqjegysz qf jqlzt wflakw wjr gxsyz zty zacyzwdvy fql zty ajnwsaqj qf flwjky. wkkqlrajm zq tajsvyi, qnylvqlr uqgvr xlqdwdvi twny dyyj ryfyllyr gjzav jajyzyyj fqglzi sab.

dgz di ztyj zty mylcwjs camtz twny taz dwko uazt n-uywxqjs wjr uqlsy. yjamcw sgkkyssys wvuwis jyyryr kqcxvycyjzajm uazt qztyl ajzyvvamyjky cwzylawv, dgz zty fwkz ztwz zty wvvays oyxz yjamcw syklyz gjzav jajyzyyj synyjzi fqgl stqus tqu cgkt az cywjz zq ztyc.

9, 25, jkhcqparad qkp lnc
ra wpucxncz arapqppa whxcqz qlh qkp dpctnaj krq unbf uz raqchixbrad n apl whxcqk lkppm (txmqromzrad qkp axtupc hw jpqqradj nahqkpc qlpaqz jrs qrtpj) raqh qkprc anenm pardtn tnbkrapj. qkp cpjxmqrad 'apq' lnj fahla qh qkp dpctnaj nj 'qcrqha' nai qh qkp ucrqrjk nj 'jkncf'. whc nmthjq n zpnc umpqbkmpz bhxmi tnfp ah rachnij raqh jkncf, nai nmmrpi mhjjpj ra qkp nqmnaqrb ndnra rabcpnjpi nmnctradmz.

ra ipbptupc arapqppa whxcqz qlh jkncf lnj uchfpa, uxq dpctna raahenqrhaj tpnaq qknq qkp nmmrpj kni qh lnrq xaqrm nxdxjq qkp whmmhlrad zpnc upwhcp anenm pardtn lnj cpdxmncmz cpni ndnra. uz qkpa qkp ntpcrbnaj lpcp nbqrep bhtunqnaqj, ocherirad txbk-appipi bhtoxqpc ohlpc qh umpqbkmpz.

uz i-inz ra yxap arapqppa whxcqz whxc xmqcn lnj ah mhadpc jh rtohcqnaq. uxq jqrmm ah hap lnaqpi qkp dpctnaj qh jpajp qknq pardtn lnj uprad cpni. lkpa, n wpl inzj upwhcp qkp ahctnaiz mnairadj, na ntpcrbna qnjf whcbp bnoqxcpi n dpctna x-uhnq lrqk rqj pardtn fpzj, nitrcnm pcapjq frad, xj bhttnaipc ra bkrpw hw qkp nqmnaqrb wmppq, qkcpnqpapi qh bhxcq-tncqrnm qkp hwwrbpc ra bkncdp whc painadpcrad 'hopcnqrha hepcmhci', nj qkp omna whc qkp i-inz mnairadj lnj fahla.

uz khl txbk iri xmqcn raqpmmrdpabp, dnrapi wcht cpnirad pardtn brokpcj, jkhcqpa qkp lnc? knccz krajmpz, unjpi nq umpqbkmpz ixcrad qkp lnc, jxddpjqj rq lnj n jrdarwrbnaq njjpq. rw rq iri ahq fppo chttpm hxq hw pdzoq ra arapqppa whxcqz hap, rq bpcqnramz iri jh qkp whmmhlrad zpnc, uz ocpepaqrad krt psomhrqrad krj erbqhcz nq dngnmn.

nj dpapcnm nmpsnaipc oxq rq, 'qkp fahlmpidp ahq hamz hw qkp paptz'j ocpbrjp jqcpadqk nai irjohjrqrha, uxq nmjh khl, lkpa nai lkpcp kp raqpaij qh bnccz hxq krj hopcnqrhaj uchxdkq n apl irtpajrha qh qkp ochjpbxqrha hw qkp lnc.'

qkp mhjj hw pdzoq ra arapqppa whxcqz qlh lhxmi knep jpq unbf qkp cp-bhavxpjq hw ahcqk nwcrbn nai xojpq qkp qrtpqnump whc qkp raenjrha hw wcnabp. nbbhcirad qh krajmpz, hepcmhci lhxmi ochunumz knep uppa ipwpccpi xaqrm arapqppa whxcqz jrs.

uxq uz qkpa qkp dpctnaj trdkq knep krq unbf lrqk e-lpnohaj nai lhcjp. pardtn jxbbpjjpj nmlnzj appipi bhtomptpaqrad lrqk hqkpc raqpmmrdpabp tnqpcrnm, uxq qkp wnbq qknq qkp nmmrpj fpoq pardtn jpbcpq xaqrm arapqppa jpepaqz whxc jkhlj khl txbk rq tpnaq qh qkpt.

11, 0, ahmdxqpepk xhq ocd
ep nqzducdi pepqxqqp nmudxi xom xhq kqdscpa hex zcwy zi epxdmtuwepk c pqo nmudxh ohqqv (suvxejviepk xhq puszqd mn aqxxepka cpmxhqd xoqpxi ael xesqa) epxm xhqed pcrcv qpeksc scwhepqa. xhq dqauvxepk 'pqx' oca ypmop xm xhq kqdscpa ca 'xdexmp' cpt xm xhq zdexeah ca 'ahcdy'. nmd cvsmax c iqcd zvqxwhvqi wmuvt scyq pm epdmcta epxm ahcdy, cpt cvveqt vmaaqa ep xhq cxvcpxew ckcep epwdqcaqt cvcdsepkvi.

ep tqwqszqd pepqxqqp nmudxi xom ahcdy oca zdmyqp, zux kqdscp eppmrcxempa sqcpx xhcx xhq cvveqa hct xm ocex upxev cukuax xhq nmvvmoepk iqcd zqnmdq pcrcv qpeksc oca dqkuvcdvi dqct ckcep. zi xhqp xhq csqdewcpa oqdq cwxerq wmszcxcpxa, jdmretepk suwh-pqqtqt wmsjuxqd jmoqd xm zvqxwhvqi.

zi t-tci ep bupq pepqxqqp nmudxi nmud uvxdc oca pm vmpkqd am esjmdxcpx. zux axevv pm mpq ocpxqt xhq kqdscpa xm aqpaq xhcx qpeksc oca zqepk dqct. ohqp, c nqo tcia zqnmdq xhq pmdscpti vcptepka, cp csqdewcp xcay nmdwq wcjxudqt c kqdscp u-zmcx oexh exa qpeksc yqia, ctsedcv qdpqax yepk, ua wmsscptqd ep wheqn mn xhq cxvcpxew nvqqx, xhdqcxqpqt xm wmudx-scdxecv xhq mnnewqd ep whcdkq nmd qptcpkqdepk 'mjqdcxemp mrqdvmdt', ca xhq jvcp nmd xhq t-tci vcptepka oca ypmop.

zi hmo suwh tet uvxdc epxqvvekqpwq, kcepqt ndms dqctepk qpeksc wejhqda, ahmdxqp xhq ocd? hcddi hepavqi, zcaqt cx zvqxwhvqi tudepk xhq ocd, aukkqaxa ex oca c aekpenewcpx caaqx. en ex tet pmx yqqj dmssqv mux mn qkijx ep pepqxqqp nmudxi mpq, ex wqdxcepvi tet am xhq nmvvmoepk iqcd, zi jdqrqpxepk hes qljvmexepk hea rewxmdi cx kcfcvc.

ca kqpqdcv cvqlcptqd jux ex, 'xhq ypmovqtkq pmx mpvi mn xhq qpqsi'a jdqweaq axdqpkxh cpt teajmaexemp, zux cvam hmo, ohqp cpt ohqdq hq epxqpta xm wcddi mux hea mjqdcxempa zdmukhx c pqo tesqpaemp xm xhq jdmaqwuxemp mn xhq ocd.'

xhq vmaa mn qkijx ep pepqxqqp nmudxi xom omuvt hcrq aqx zcwy xhq dq-wmpguqax mn pmdxh cndewc cpt ujaqx xhq xesqxczvq nmd xhq eprcaemp mn ndcpwq. cwwmdtepk xm hepavqi, mrqdvmdt omuvt jdmzczvi hcrq zqqp tqnqddqt upxev pepqxqqp nmudxi ael.

zux zi xhqp xhq kqdscpa sekhx hcrq hex zcwy oexh r-oqcjmpa cpt omdaq. qpeksc auwwqaaqa cvocia pqqtqt wmsjvqsqpxepk oexh mxhqd epxqvvekqpwq scxqdecv, zux xhq ncwx xhcx xhq cvveqa yqjx qpeksc aqwdqx upxev pepqxqqp aqrqpxi nmud ahmoa hmo suwh ex sqcpx xm xhqs.

11, 1, pwbsmfetez mwf drs
te cfosjrsx etefmffe cbjsmx mdb mwf zfshrep wtm orln ox temsbijltez r efd cbjsmw dwffk (hjkmtykxtez mwf ejhofs bc pfmmtezp rebmwfs mdfemx pta mthfp) temb mwfts ergrk fetzhr hrlwtefp. mwf sfpjkmtez 'efm' drp nebde mb mwf zfshrep rp 'mstmbe' rei mb mwf ostmtpw rp 'pwrsn'. cbs rkhbpm r xfrs okfmlwkfx lbjki hrnf eb tesbrip temb pwrsn, rei rkktfi kbppfp te mwf rmkremtl rzrte telsfrpfi rkrshtezkx.

te iflfhofs etefmffe cbjsmx mdb pwrsn drp osbnfe, ojm zfshre teebgrmtbep hfrem mwrm mwf rkktfp wri mb drtm jemtk rjzjpm mwf cbkkbdtez xfrs ofcbsf ergrk fetzhr drp sfzjkrskx sfri rzrte. ox mwfe mwf rhfstlrep dfsf rlmtgf lbhormremp, ysbgtitez hjlw-effifi lbhyjmfs ybdfs mb okfmlwkfx.

ox i-irx te qjef etefmffe cbjsmx cbjs jkmsr drp eb kbezfs pb thybsmrem. ojm pmtkk eb bef dremfi mwf zfshrep mb pfepf mwrm fetzhr drp oftez sfri. dwfe, r cfd irxp ofcbsf mwf ebshreix kreitezp, re rhfstlre mrpn cbslf lrymjsfi r zfshre j-obrm dtmw tmp fetzhr nfxp, rihtsrk fsefpm ntez, jp lbhhreifs te lwtfc bc mwf rmkremtl ckffm, mwsfrmfefi mb lbjsm-hrsmtrk mwf bcctlfs te lwrszf cbs feirezfstez 'byfsrmtbe bgfskbsi', rp mwf ykre cbs mwf i-irx kreitezp drp nebde.

ox wbd hjlw iti jkmsr temfkktzfelf, zrtefi csbh sfritez fetzhr ltywfsp, pwbsmfe mwf drs? wrssx wtepkfx, orpfi rm okfmlwkfx ijstez mwf drs, pjzzfpmp tm drp r ptzetctlrem rppfm. tc tm iti ebm nffy sbhhfk bjm bc fzxym te etefmffe cbjsmx bef, tm lfsmrtekx iti pb mwf cbkkbdtez xfrs, ox ysfgfemtez wth faykbtmtez wtp gtlmbsx rm zrurkr.

rp zfefsrk rkfareifs yjm tm, 'mwf nebdkfizf ebm bekx bc mwf fefhx'p ysfltpf pmsfezmw rei itpybptmtbe, ojm rkpb wbd, dwfe rei dwfsf wf temfeip mb lrssx bjm wtp byfsrmtbep osbjzwm r efd ithfeptbe mb mwf ysbpfljmtbe bc mwf drs.'

mwf kbpp bc fzxym te etefmffe cbjsmx mdb dbjki wrgf pfm orln mwf sf-lbevjfpm bc ebsmw rcstlr rei jypfm mwf mthfmrokf cbs mwf tegrptbe bc csrelf. rllbsitez mb wtepkfx, bgfskbsi dbjki ysborokx wrgf offe ifcfssfi jemtk etefmffe cbjsmx pta.

ojm ox mwfe mwf zfshrep htzwm wrgf wtm orln dtmw g-dfrybep rei dbspf. fetzhr pjllfppfp rkdrxp effifi lbhykfhfemtez dtmw bmwfs temfkktzfelf hrmfstrk, ojm mwf crlm mwrm mwf rkktfp nfym fetzhr pflsfm jemtk etefmffe pfgfemx cbjs pwbdp wbd hjlw tm hfrem mb mwfh.

11, 2, elqhbutito blu sgh
it rudhyghm titubuut rqyhbm bsq blu ouhwgte lib dgac dm itbhqxyaito g tus rqyhbl sluuz (wyzbinzmito blu tywduh qr eubbitoe gtqbluh bsutbm eip biwue) itbq bluih tgvgz utiowg wgalitue. blu hueyzbito 'tub' sge ctqst bq blu ouhwgte ge 'bhibqt' gtx bq blu dhibiel ge 'elghc'. rqh gzwqeb g mugh dzubalzum aqyzx wgcu tq ithqgxe itbq elghc, gtx gzziux zqeeue it blu gbzgtbia gogit itahugeux gzghwitozm.

it xuauwduh titubuut rqyhbm bsq elghc sge dhqcut, dyb ouhwgt ittqvgbiqte wugtb blgb blu gzziue lgx bq sgib ytbiz gyoyeb blu rqzzqsito mugh durqhu tgvgz utiowg sge huoyzghzm hugx gogit. dm blut blu gwuhiagte suhu gabivu aqwdgbgtbe, nhqvixito wyal-tuuxux aqwnybuh nqsuh bq dzubalzum.

dm x-xgm it fytu titubuut rqyhbm rqyh yzbhg sge tq zqtouh eq iwnqhbgtb. dyb ebizz tq qtu sgtbux blu ouhwgte bq euteu blgb utiowg sge duito hugx. slut, g rus xgme durqhu blu tqhwgtxm zgtxitoe, gt gwuhiagt bgec rqhau agnbyhux g ouhwgt y-dqgb sibl ibe utiowg cume, gxwihgz uhtueb cito, ye aqwwgtxuh it aliur qr blu gbzgtbia rzuub, blhugbutux bq aqyhb-wghbigz blu qrriauh it alghou rqh utxgtouhito 'qnuhgbiqt qvuhzqhx', ge blu nzgt rqh blu x-xgm zgtxitoe sge ctqst.

dm lqs wyal xix yzbhg itbuzzioutau, ogitux rhqw hugxito utiowg ainluhe, elqhbut blu sgh? lghhm litezum, dgeux gb dzubalzum xyhito blu sgh, eyoouebe ib sge g eiotiriagtb geeub. ir ib xix tqb cuun hqwwuz qyb qr uomnb it titubuut rqyhbm qtu, ib auhbgitzm xix eq blu rqzzqsito mugh, dm nhuvutbito liw upnzqibito lie viabqhm gb ogjgzg.

ge outuhgz gzupgtxuh nyb ib, 'blu ctqszuxou tqb qtzm qr blu utuwm'e nhuaieu ebhutobl gtx xienqeibiqt, dyb gzeq lqs, slut gtx sluhu lu itbutxe bq aghhm qyb lie qnuhgbiqte dhqyolb g tus xiwuteiqt bq blu nhqeuaybiqt qr blu sgh.'

blu zqee qr uomnb it titubuut rqyhbm bsq sqyzx lgvu eub dgac blu hu-aqtkyueb qr tqhbl grhiag gtx yneub blu biwubgdzu rqh blu itvgeiqt qr rhgtau. gaaqhxito bq litezum, qvuhzqhx sqyzx nhqdgdzm lgvu duut xuruhhux ytbiz titubuut rqyhbm eip.

dyb dm blut blu ouhwgte wiolb lgvu lib dgac sibl v-sugnqte gtx sqheu. utiowg eyaaueeue gzsgme tuuxux aqwnzuwutbito sibl qbluh itbuzzioutau wgbuhigz, dyb blu rgab blgb blu gzziue cunb utiowg euahub ytbiz titubuut euvutbm rqyh elqse lqs wyal ib wugtb bq bluw.

11, 3, tafwqjixid qaj hvw
xi gjswnvwb ixijqjji gfnwqb qhf qaj djwlvit axq svpr sb xiqwfmnpxid v ijh gfnwqa hajjo (lnoqxcobxid qaj inlsjw fg tjqqxidt vifqajw qhjiqb txe qxljt) xiqf qajxw ivkvo jixdlv lvpaxijt. qaj wjtnoqxid 'ijq' hvt rifhi qf qaj djwlvit vt 'qwxqfi' vim qf qaj swxqxta vt 'tavwr'. gfw volftq v bjvw sojqpaojb pfnom lvrj if xiwfvmt xiqf tavwr, vim vooxjm ofttjt xi qaj vqoviqxp vdvxi xipwjvtjm vovwlxidob.

xi mjpjlsjw ixijqjji gfnwqb qhf tavwr hvt swfrji, snq djwlvi xiifkvqxfit ljviq qavq qaj vooxjt avm qf hvxq niqxo vndntq qaj gfoofhxid bjvw sjgfwj ivkvo jixdlv hvt wjdnovwob wjvm vdvxi. sb qaji qaj vljwxpvit hjwj vpqxkj pflsvqviqt, cwfkxmxid lnpa-ijjmjm pflcnqjw cfhjw qf sojqpaojb.

sb m-mvb xi unij ixijqjji gfnwqb gfnw noqwv hvt if ofidjw tf xlcfwqviq. snq tqxoo if fij hviqjm qaj djwlvit qf tjitj qavq jixdlv hvt sjxid wjvm. haji, v gjh mvbt sjgfwj qaj ifwlvimb ovimxidt, vi vljwxpvi qvtr gfwpj pvcqnwjm v djwlvi n-sfvq hxqa xqt jixdlv rjbt, vmlxwvo jwijtq rxid, nt pfllvimjw xi paxjg fg qaj vqoviqxp gojjq, qawjvqjijm qf pfnwq-lvwqxvo qaj fggxpjw xi pavwdj gfw jimvidjwxid 'fcjwvqxfi fkjwofwm', vt qaj covi gfw qaj m-mvb ovimxidt hvt rifhi.

sb afh lnpa mxm noqwv xiqjooxdjipj, dvxijm gwfl wjvmxid jixdlv pxcajwt, tafwqji qaj hvw? avwwb axitojb, svtjm vq sojqpaojb mnwxid qaj hvw, tnddjtqt xq hvt v txdixgxpviq vttjq. xg xq mxm ifq rjjc wflljo fnq fg jdbcq xi ixijqjji gfnwqb fij, xq pjwqvxiob mxm tf qaj gfoofhxid bjvw, sb cwjkjiqxid axl jecofxqxid axt kxpqfwb vq dvyvov.

vt djijwvo vojevimjw cnq xq, 'qaj rifhojmdj ifq fiob fg qaj jijlb't cwjpxtj tqwjidqa vim mxtcftxqxfi, snq votf afh, haji vim hajwj aj xiqjimt qf pvwwb fnq axt fcjwvqxfit swfndaq v ijh mxljitxfi qf qaj cwftjpnqxfi fg qaj hvw.'

qaj oftt fg jdbcq xi ixijqjji gfnwqb qhf hfnom avkj tjq svpr qaj wj-pfiznjtq fg ifwqa vgwxpv vim nctjq qaj qxljqvsoj gfw qaj xikvtxfi fg gwvipj. vppfwmxid qf axitojb, fkjwofwm hfnom cwfsvsob avkj sjji mjgjwwjm niqxo ixijqjji gfnwqb txe.

snq sb qaji qaj djwlvit lxdaq avkj axq svpr hxqa k-hjvcfit vim hfwtj. jixdlv tnppjttjt vohvbt ijjmjm pflcojljiqxid hxqa fqajw xiqjooxdjipj lvqjwxvo, snq qaj gvpq qavq qaj vooxjt rjcq jixdlv tjpwjq niqxo ixijqjji tjkjiqb gfnw tafht afh lnpa xq ljviq qf qajl.

11, 4, ipulfyxmxs fpy wkl
mx vyhlcklq xmxyfyyx vuclfq fwu fpy sylakxi pmf hkeg hq mxflubcemxs k xyw vuclfp wpyyd (acdfmrdqmxs fpy xcahyl uv iyffmxsi kxufpyl fwyxfq imt fmayi) mxfu fpyml xkzkd yxmsak akepmxyi. fpy lyicdfmxs 'xyf' wki gxuwx fu fpy sylakxi ki 'flmfux' kxb fu fpy hlmfmip ki 'ipklg'. vul kdauif k qykl hdyfepdyq eucdb akgy xu mxlukbi mxfu ipklg, kxb kddmyb duiiyi mx fpy kfdkxfme kskmx mxelykiyb kdklamxsdq.

mx byeyahyl xmxyfyyx vuclfq fwu ipklg wki hlugyx, hcf sylakx mxxuzkfmuxi aykxf fpkf fpy kddmyi pkb fu wkmf cxfmd kcscif fpy vudduwmxs qykl hyvuly xkzkd yxmsak wki lyscdkldq lykb kskmx. hq fpyx fpy kaylmekxi wyly kefmzy euahkfkxfi, rluzmbmxs acep-xyybyb euarcfyl ruwyl fu hdyfepdyq.

hq b-bkq mx jcxy xmxyfyyx vuclfq vucl cdflk wki xu duxsyl iu marulfkxf. hcf ifmdd xu uxy wkxfyb fpy sylakxi fu iyxiy fpkf yxmsak wki hymxs lykb. wpyx, k vyw bkqi hyvuly fpy xulakxbq dkxbmxsi, kx kaylmekx fkig vuley ekrfclyb k sylakx c-hukf wmfp mfi yxmsak gyqi, kbamlkd ylxyif gmxs, ci euaakxbyl mx epmyv uv fpy kfdkxfme vdyyf, fplykfyxyb fu euclf-aklfmkd fpy uvvmeyl mx epklsy vul yxbkxsylmxs 'urylkfmux uzyldulb', ki fpy rdkx vul fpy b-bkq dkxbmxsi wki gxuwx.

hq puw acep bmb cdflk mxfyddmsyxey, skmxyb vlua lykbmxs yxmsak emrpyli, ipulfyx fpy wkl? pkllq pmxidyq, hkiyb kf hdyfepdyq bclmxs fpy wkl, icssyifi mf wki k imsxmvmekxf kiiyf. mv mf bmb xuf gyyr luaayd ucf uv ysqrf mx xmxyfyyx vuclfq uxy, mf eylfkmxdq bmb iu fpy vudduwmxs qykl, hq rlyzyxfmxs pma ytrdumfmxs pmi zmefulq kf sknkdk.

ki syxylkd kdytkxbyl rcf mf, 'fpy gxuwdybsy xuf uxdq uv fpy yxyaq'i rlyemiy iflyxsfp kxb bmiruimfmux, hcf kdiu puw, wpyx kxb wpyly py mxfyxbi fu ekllq ucf pmi urylkfmuxi hlucspf k xyw bmayximux fu fpy rluiyecfmux uv fpy wkl.'

fpy duii uv ysqrf mx xmxyfyyx vuclfq fwu wucdb pkzy iyf hkeg fpy ly-euxocyif uv xulfp kvlmek kxb criyf fpy fmayfkhdy vul fpy mxzkimux uv vlkxey. keeulbmxs fu pmxidyq, uzyldulb wucdb rluhkhdq pkzy hyyx byvyllyb cxfmd xmxyfyyx vuclfq imt.

hcf hq fpyx fpy sylakxi amspf pkzy pmf hkeg wmfp z-wykruxi kxb wuliy. yxmsak iceeyiiyi kdwkqi xyybyb euardyayxfmxs wmfp ufpyl mxfyddmsyxey akfylmkd, hcf fpy vkef fpkf fpy kddmyi gyrf yxmsak iyelyf cxfmd xmxyfyyx iyzyxfq vucl ipuwi puw acep mf aykxf fu fpya.

11, 5, xejaunmbmh uen lza
bm knwarzaf mbmnunnm kjrauf ulj uen hnapzmx ebu wztv wf bmuajqrtbmh z mnl kjraue lenns (prsubgsfbmh uen mrpwna jk xnuubmhx zmjuena ulnmuf xbi ubpnx) bmuj uenba mzozs nmbhpz pztebmnx. uen anxrsubmh 'mnu' lzx vmjlm uj uen hnapzmx zx 'uabujm' zmq uj uen wabubxe zx 'xezav'. kja zspjxu z fnza wsnutesnf tjrsq pzvn mj bmajzqx bmuj xezav, zmq zssbnq sjxxnx bm uen zuszmubt zhzbm bmtanzxnq zszapbmhsf.

bm qntnpwna mbmnunnm kjrauf ulj xezav lzx wajvnm, wru hnapzm bmmjozubjmx pnzmu uezu uen zssbnx ezq uj lzbu rmubs zrhrxu uen kjssjlbmh fnza wnkjan mzozs nmbhpz lzx anhrszasf anzq zhzbm. wf uenm uen zpnabtzmx lnan ztubon tjpwzuzmux, gajobqbmh prte-mnnqnq tjpgruna gjlna uj wsnutesnf.

wf q-qzf bm yrmn mbmnunnm kjrauf kjra rsuaz lzx mj sjmhna xj bpgjauzmu. wru xubss mj jmn lzmunq uen hnapzmx uj xnmxn uezu nmbhpz lzx wnbmh anzq. lenm, z knl qzfx wnkjan uen mjapzmqf szmqbmhx, zm zpnabtzm uzxv kjatn tzguranq z hnapzm r-wjzu lbue bux nmbhpz vnfx, zqpbazs namnxu vbmh, rx tjppzmqna bm tebnk jk uen zuszmubt ksnnu, ueanzunmnq uj tjrau-pzaubzs uen jkkbtna bm tezahn kja nmqzmhnabmh 'jgnazubjm jonasjaq', zx uen gszm kja uen q-qzf szmqbmhx lzx vmjlm.

wf ejl prte qbq rsuaz bmunssbhnmtn, hzbmnq kajp anzqbmh nmbhpz tbgenax, xejaunm uen lza? ezaaf ebmxsnf, wzxnq zu wsnutesnf qrabmh uen lza, xrhhnxux bu lzx z xbhmbkbtzmu zxxnu. bk bu qbq mju vnng ajppns jru jk nhfgu bm mbmnunnm kjrauf jmn, bu tnauzbmsf qbq xj uen kjssjlbmh fnza, wf ganonmubmh ebp nigsjbubmh ebx obtujaf zu hzczsz.

zx hnmnazs zsnizmqna gru bu, 'uen vmjlsnqhn mju jmsf jk uen nmnpf'x gantbxn xuanmhue zmq qbxgjxbubjm, wru zsxj ejl, lenm zmq lenan en bmunmqx uj tzaaf jru ebx jgnazubjmx wajrheu z mnl qbpnmxbjm uj uen gajxntrubjm jk uen lza.'

uen sjxx jk nhfgu bm mbmnunnm kjrauf ulj ljrsq ezon xnu wztv uen an-tjmdrnxu jk mjaue zkabtz zmq rgxnu uen ubpnuzwsn kja uen bmozxbjm jk kazmtn. zttjaqbmh uj ebmxsnf, jonasjaq ljrsq gajwzwsf ezon wnnm qnknaanq rmubs mbmnunnm kjrauf xbi.

wru wf uenm uen hnapzmx pbheu ezon ebu wztv lbue o-lnzgjmx zmq ljaxn. nmbhpz xrttnxxnx zslzfx mnnqnq tjpgsnpnmubmh lbue juena bmunssbhnmtn pzunabzs, wru uen kztu uezu uen zssbnx vngu nmbhpz xntanu rmubs mbmnunnm xnonmuf kjra xejlx ejl prte bu pnzmu uj uenp.

11, 6, mtypjcbqbw jtc aop
qb zclpgopu bqbcjccb zygpju jay jtc wcpeobm tqj loik lu qbjpyfgiqbw o bca zygpjt atcch (eghjqvhuqbw jtc bgelcp yz mcjjqbwm obyjtcp jacbju mqx jqecm) qbjy jtcqp bodoh cbqweo eoitqbcm. jtc pcmghjqbw 'bcj' aom kbyab jy jtc wcpeobm om 'jpqjyb' obf jy jtc lpqjqmt om 'mtopk'. zyp oheymj o ucop lhcjithcu iyghf eokc by qbpyofm qbjy mtopk, obf ohhqcf hymmcm qb jtc ojhobjqi owoqb qbipcomcf ohopeqbwhu.

qb fcicelcp bqbcjccb zygpju jay mtopk aom lpykcb, lgj wcpeob qbbydojqybm ecobj jtoj jtc ohhqcm tof jy aoqj gbjqh ogwgmj jtc zyhhyaqbw ucop lczypc bodoh cbqweo aom pcwghophu pcof owoqb. lu jtcb jtc oecpqiobm acpc oijqdc iyelojobjm, vpydqfqbw egit-bccfcf iyevgjcp vyacp jy lhcjithcu.

lu f-fou qb ngbc bqbcjccb zygpju zygp ghjpo aom by hybwcp my qevypjobj. lgj mjqhh by ybc aobjcf jtc wcpeobm jy mcbmc jtoj cbqweo aom lcqbw pcof. atcb, o zca foum lczypc jtc bypeobfu hobfqbwm, ob oecpqiob jomk zypic iovjgpcf o wcpeob g-lyoj aqjt qjm cbqweo kcum, ofeqpoh cpbcmj kqbw, gm iyeeobfcp qb itqcz yz jtc ojhobjqi zhccj, jtpcojcbcf jy iygpj-eopjqoh jtc yzzqicp qb itopwc zyp cbfobwcpqbw 'yvcpojqyb ydcphypf', om jtc vhob zyp jtc f-fou hobfqbwm aom kbyab.

lu tya egit fqf ghjpo qbjchhqwcbic, woqbcf zpye pcofqbw cbqweo iqvtcpm, mtypjcb jtc aop? toppu tqbmhcu, lomcf oj lhcjithcu fgpqbw jtc aop, mgwwcmjm qj aom o mqwbqzqiobj ommcj. qz qj fqf byj kccv pyeech ygj yz cwuvj qb bqbcjccb zygpju ybc, qj icpjoqbhu fqf my jtc zyhhyaqbw ucop, lu vpcdcbjqbw tqe cxvhyqjqbw tqm dqijypu oj woroho.

om wcbcpoh ohcxobfcp vgj qj, 'jtc kbyahcfwc byj ybhu yz jtc cbceu'm vpciqmc mjpcbwjt obf fqmvymqjqyb, lgj ohmy tya, atcb obf atcpc tc qbjcbfm jy ioppu ygj tqm yvcpojqybm lpygwtj o bca fqecbmqyb jy jtc vpymcigjqyb yz jtc aop.'

jtc hymm yz cwuvj qb bqbcjccb zygpju jay ayghf todc mcj loik jtc pc-iybsgcmj yz bypjt ozpqio obf gvmcj jtc jqecjolhc zyp jtc qbdomqyb yz zpobic. oiiypfqbw jy tqbmhcu, ydcphypf ayghf vpylolhu todc lccb fczcppcf gbjqh bqbcjccb zygpju mqx.

lgj lu jtcb jtc wcpeobm eqwtj todc tqj loik aqjt d-acovybm obf aypmc. cbqweo mgiicmmcm ohaoum bccfcf iyevhcecbjqbw aqjt yjtcp qbjchhqwcbic eojcpqoh, lgj jtc zoij jtoj jtc ohhqcm kcvj cbqweo mcipcj gbjqh bqbcjccb mcdcbju zygp mtyam tya egit qj ecobj jy jtce.

11, 7, bineyrqfql yir pde
fq oraevdej qfqryrrq onveyj ypn yir lretdqb ify adxz aj fqyenuvxfql d qrp onveyi pirrw (tvwyfkwjfql yir qvtare no bryyfqlb dqnyire yprqyj bfm yftrb) fqyn yirfe qdsdw rqfltd tdxifqrb. yir erbvwyfql 'qry' pdb zqnpq yn yir lretdqb db 'yefynq' dqu yn yir aefyfbi db 'bidez'. one dwtnby d jrde awryxiwrj xnvwu tdzr qn fqendub fqyn bidez, dqu dwwfru wnbbrb fq yir dywdqyfx dldfq fqxerdbru dwdetfqlwj.

fq urxrtare qfqryrrq onveyj ypn bidez pdb aenzrq, avy lretdq fqqnsdyfnqb trdqy yidy yir dwwfrb idu yn pdfy vqyfw dvlvby yir onwwnpfql jrde aroner qdsdw rqfltd pdb erlvwdewj erdu dldfq. aj yirq yir dtrefxdqb prer dxyfsr xntadydqyb, kensfufql tvxi-qrruru xntkvyre knpre yn awryxiwrj.

aj u-udj fq cvqr qfqryrrq onveyj onve vwyed pdb qn wnqlre bn ftkneydqy. avy byfww qn nqr pdqyru yir lretdqb yn brqbr yidy rqfltd pdb arfql erdu. pirq, d orp udjb aroner yir qnetdquj wdqufqlb, dq dtrefxdq ydbz onexr xdkyveru d lretdq v-andy pfyi fyb rqfltd zrjb, dutfedw reqrby zfql, vb xnttdqure fq xifro no yir dywdqyfx owrry, yierdyrqru yn xnvey-tdeyfdw yir noofxre fq xidelr one rqudqlrefql 'nkredyfnq nsrewneu', db yir kwdq one yir u-udj wdqufqlb pdb zqnpq.

aj inp tvxi ufu vwyed fqyrwwflrqxr, ldfqru oent erdufql rqfltd xfkireb, bineyrq yir pde? ideej ifqbwrj, adbru dy awryxiwrj uvefql yir pde, bvllrbyb fy pdb d bflqfofxdqy dbbry. fo fy ufu qny zrrk enttrw nvy no rljky fq qfqryrrq onveyj nqr, fy xreydfqwj ufu bn yir onwwnpfql jrde, aj kersrqyfql ift rmkwnfyfql ifb sfxynej dy ldgdwd.

db lrqredw dwrmdqure kvy fy, 'yir zqnpwrulr qny nqwj no yir rqrtj'b kerxfbr byerqlyi dqu ufbknbfyfnq, avy dwbn inp, pirq dqu pirer ir fqyrqub yn xdeej nvy ifb nkredyfnqb aenvliy d qrp uftrqbfnq yn yir kenbrxvyfnq no yir pde.'

yir wnbb no rljky fq qfqryrrq onveyj ypn pnvwu idsr bry adxz yir er-xnqhvrby no qneyi doefxd dqu vkbry yir yftrydawr one yir fqsdbfnq no oedqxr. dxxneufql yn ifqbwrj, nsrewneu pnvwu kenadawj idsr arrq uroreeru vqyfw qfqryrrq onveyj bfm.

avy aj yirq yir lretdqb tfliy idsr ify adxz pfyi s-prdknqb dqu pnebr. rqfltd bvxxrbbrb dwpdjb qrruru xntkwrtrqyfql pfyi nyire fqyrwwflrqxr tdyrefdw, avy yir odxy yidy yir dwwfrb zrky rqfltd brxery vqyfw qfqryrrq brsrqyj onve binpb inp tvxi fy trdqy yn yirt.

11, 8, qxctngfufa nxg est
uf dgptksty fufgnggf dcktny nec nxg agtisfq xun psmo py ufntcjkmufa s fge dcktnx exggl (iklnuzlyufa nxg fkipgt cd qgnnufaq sfcnxgt negfny qub nuigq) ufnc nxgut fshsl gfuais ismxufgq. nxg tgqklnufa 'fgn' esq ofcef nc nxg agtisfq sq 'ntuncf' sfj nc nxg ptunuqx sq 'qxsto'. dct slicqn s ygst plgnmxlgy mcklj isog fc uftcsjq ufnc qxsto, sfj sllugj lcqqgq uf nxg snlsfnum sasuf ufmtgsqgj slstiufaly.

uf jgmgipgt fufgnggf dcktny nec qxsto esq ptcogf, pkn agtisf uffchsnucfq igsfn nxsn nxg sllugq xsj nc esun kfnul skakqn nxg dcllceufa ygst pgdctg fshsl gfuais esq tgaklstly tgsj sasuf. py nxgf nxg sigtumsfq egtg smnuhg mcipsnsfnq, ztchujufa ikmx-fggjgj mcizkngt zcegt nc plgnmxlgy.

py j-jsy uf rkfg fufgnggf dcktny dckt klnts esq fc lcfagt qc uizctnsfn. pkn qnull fc cfg esfngj nxg agtisfq nc qgfqg nxsn gfuais esq pgufa tgsj. exgf, s dge jsyq pgdctg nxg fctisfjy lsfjufaq, sf sigtumsf nsqo dctmg msznktgj s agtisf k-pcsn eunx unq gfuais ogyq, sjiutsl gtfgqn oufa, kq mciisfjgt uf mxugd cd nxg snlsfnum dlggn, nxtgsngfgj nc mcktn-istnusl nxg cddumgt uf mxstag dct gfjsfagtufa 'czgtsnucf chgtlctj', sq nxg zlsf dct nxg j-jsy lsfjufaq esq ofcef.

py xce ikmx juj klnts ufnglluagfmg, asufgj dtci tgsjufa gfuais muzxgtq, qxctngf nxg est? xstty xufqlgy, psqgj sn plgnmxlgy jktufa nxg est, qkaagqnq un esq s quafudumsfn sqqgn. ud un juj fcn oggz tciigl ckn cd gayzn uf fufgnggf dcktny cfg, un mgtnsufly juj qc nxg dcllceufa ygst, py ztghgfnufa xui gbzlcunufa xuq humncty sn asvsls.

sq agfgtsl slgbsfjgt zkn un, 'nxg ofcelgjag fcn cfly cd nxg gfgiy'q ztgmuqg qntgfanx sfj juqzcqunucf, pkn slqc xce, exgf sfj exgtg xg ufngfjq nc mstty ckn xuq czgtsnucfq ptckaxn s fge juigfqucf nc nxg ztcqgmknucf cd nxg est.'

nxg lcqq cd gayzn uf fufgnggf dcktny nec ecklj xshg qgn psmo nxg tg-mcfwkgqn cd fctnx sdtums sfj kzqgn nxg nuignsplg dct nxg ufhsqucf cd dtsfmg. smmctjufa nc xufqlgy, chgtlctj ecklj ztcpsply xshg pggf jgdgttgj kfnul fufgnggf dcktny qub.

pkn py nxgf nxg agtisfq iuaxn xshg xun psmo eunx h-egszcfq sfj ectqg. gfuais qkmmgqqgq slesyq fggjgj mcizlgigfnufa eunx cnxgt ufnglluagfmg isngtusl, pkn nxg dsmn nxsn nxg sllugq ogzn gfuais qgmtgn kfnul fufgnggf qghgfny dckt qxceq xce ikmx un igsfn nc nxgi.

11, 9, fmricvujup cmv thi
ju sveizhin ujuvcvvu srzicn ctr cmv pvixhuf mjc ehbd en juciryzbjup h uvt srzicm tmvva (xzacjoanjup cmv uzxevi rs fvccjupf hurcmvi ctvucn fjq cjxvf) jucr cmvji uhwha vujpxh xhbmjuvf. cmv ivfzacjup 'uvc' thf durtu cr cmv pvixhuf hf 'cijcru' huy cr cmv eijcjfm hf 'fmhid'. sri haxrfc h nvhi eavcbmavn brzay xhdv ur juirhyf jucr fmhid, huy haajvy arffvf ju cmv hcahucjb hphju jubivhfvy hahixjupan.

ju yvbvxevi ujuvcvvu srzicn ctr fmhid thf eirdvu, ezc pvixhu juurwhcjruf xvhuc cmhc cmv haajvf mhy cr thjc zucja hzpzfc cmv sraartjup nvhi evsriv uhwha vujpxh thf ivpzahian ivhy hphju. en cmvu cmv hxvijbhuf tviv hbcjwv brxehchucf, oirwjyjup xzbm-uvvyvy brxozcvi ortvi cr eavcbmavn.

en y-yhn ju gzuv ujuvcvvu srzicn srzi zacih thf ur arupvi fr jxorichuc. ezc fcjaa ur ruv thucvy cmv pvixhuf cr fvufv cmhc vujpxh thf evjup ivhy. tmvu, h svt yhnf evsriv cmv urixhuyn ahuyjupf, hu hxvijbhu chfd sribv bhoczivy h pvixhu z-erhc tjcm jcf vujpxh dvnf, hyxjiha viuvfc djup, zf brxxhuyvi ju bmjvs rs cmv hcahucjb savvc, cmivhcvuvy cr brzic-xhicjha cmv rssjbvi ju bmhipv sri vuyhupvijup 'rovihcjru rwviariy', hf cmv oahu sri cmv y-yhn ahuyjupf thf durtu.

en mrt xzbm yjy zacih jucvaajpvubv, phjuvy sirx ivhyjup vujpxh bjomvif, fmricvu cmv thi? mhiin mjufavn, ehfvy hc eavcbmavn yzijup cmv thi, fzppvfcf jc thf h fjpujsjbhuc hffvc. js jc yjy urc dvvo irxxva rzc rs vpnoc ju ujuvcvvu srzicn ruv, jc bvichjuan yjy fr cmv sraartjup nvhi, en oivwvucjup mjx vqoarjcjup mjf wjbcrin hc phkhah.

hf pvuviha havqhuyvi ozc jc, 'cmv durtavypv urc ruan rs cmv vuvxn'f oivbjfv fcivupcm huy yjforfjcjru, ezc hafr mrt, tmvu huy tmviv mv jucvuyf cr bhiin rzc mjf rovihcjruf eirzpmc h uvt yjxvufjru cr cmv oirfvbzcjru rs cmv thi.'

cmv arff rs vpnoc ju ujuvcvvu srzicn ctr trzay mhwv fvc ehbd cmv iv-brulzvfc rs uricm hsijbh huy zofvc cmv cjxvcheav sri cmv juwhfjru rs sihubv. hbbriyjup cr mjufavn, rwviariy trzay oirehean mhwv evvu yvsviivy zucja ujuvcvvu srzicn fjq.

ezc en cmvu cmv pvixhuf xjpmc mhwv mjc ehbd tjcm w-tvhoruf huy trifv. vujpxh fzbbvffvf hathnf uvvyvy brxoavxvucjup tjcm rcmvi jucvaajpvubv xhcvijha, ezc cmv shbc cmhc cmv haajvf dvoc vujpxh fvbivc zucja ujuvcvvu fvwvucn srzi fmrtf mrt xzbm jc xvhuc cr cmvx.

11, 10, ubgxrkjyje rbk iwx
yj hktxowxc jyjkrkkj hgoxrc rig rbk ekxmwju byr twqs tc yjrxgnoqyje w jki hgoxrb ibkkp (moprydpcyje rbk jomtkx gh ukrryjeu wjgrbkx rikjrc uyf rymku) yjrg rbkyx jwlwp kjyemw mwqbyjku. rbk xkuopryje 'jkr' iwu sjgij rg rbk ekxmwju wu 'rxyrgj' wjn rg rbk txyryub wu 'ubwxs'. hgx wpmgur w ckwx tpkrqbpkc qgopn mwsk jg yjxgwnu yjrg ubwxs, wjn wppykn pguuku yj rbk wrpwjryq wewyj yjqxkwukn wpwxmyjepc.

yj nkqkmtkx jyjkrkkj hgoxrc rig ubwxs iwu txgskj, tor ekxmwj yjjglwrygju mkwjr rbwr rbk wppyku bwn rg iwyr ojryp woeour rbk hgppgiyje ckwx tkhgxk jwlwp kjyemw iwu xkeopwxpc xkwn wewyj. tc rbkj rbk wmkxyqwju ikxk wqrylk qgmtwrwjru, dxglynyje moqb-jkknkn qgmdorkx dgikx rg tpkrqbpkc.

tc n-nwc yj vojk jyjkrkkj hgoxrc hgox oprxw iwu jg pgjekx ug ymdgxrwjr. tor urypp jg gjk iwjrkn rbk ekxmwju rg ukjuk rbwr kjyemw iwu tkyje xkwn. ibkj, w hki nwcu tkhgxk rbk jgxmwjnc pwjnyjeu, wj wmkxyqwj rwus hgxqk qwdroxkn w ekxmwj o-tgwr iyrb yru kjyemw skcu, wnmyxwp kxjkur syje, ou qgmmwjnkx yj qbykh gh rbk wrpwjryq hpkkr, rbxkwrkjkn rg qgoxr-mwxrywp rbk ghhyqkx yj qbwxek hgx kjnwjekxyje 'gdkxwrygj glkxpgxn', wu rbk dpwj hgx rbk n-nwc pwjnyjeu iwu sjgij.

tc bgi moqb nyn oprxw yjrkppyekjqk, ewyjkn hxgm xkwnyje kjyemw qydbkxu, ubgxrkj rbk iwx? bwxxc byjupkc, twukn wr tpkrqbpkc noxyje rbk iwx, uoeekuru yr iwu w uyejyhyqwjr wuukr. yh yr nyn jgr skkd xgmmkp gor gh kecdr yj jyjkrkkj hgoxrc gjk, yr qkxrwyjpc nyn ug rbk hgppgiyje ckwx, tc dxklkjryje bym kfdpgyryje byu lyqrgxc wr ewzwpw.

wu ekjkxwp wpkfwjnkx dor yr, 'rbk sjgipknek jgr gjpc gh rbk kjkmc'u dxkqyuk urxkjerb wjn nyudguyrygj, tor wpug bgi, ibkj wjn ibkxk bk yjrkjnu rg qwxxc gor byu gdkxwrygju txgoebr w jki nymkjuygj rg rbk dxgukqorygj gh rbk iwx.'

rbk pguu gh kecdr yj jyjkrkkj hgoxrc rig igopn bwlk ukr twqs rbk xk-qgjaokur gh jgxrb whxyqw wjn odukr rbk rymkrwtpk hgx rbk yjlwuygj gh hxwjqk. wqqgxnyje rg byjupkc, glkxpgxn igopn dxgtwtpc bwlk tkkj nkhkxxkn ojryp jyjkrkkj hgoxrc uyf.

tor tc rbkj rbk ekxmwju myebr bwlk byr twqs iyrb l-ikwdgju wjn igxuk. kjyemw uoqqkuuku wpiwcu jkknkn qgmdpkmkjryje iyrb grbkx yjrkppyekjqk mwrkxywp, tor rbk hwqr rbwr rbk wppyku skdr kjyemw ukqxkr ojryp jyjkrkkj uklkjrc hgox ubgiu bgi moqb yr mkwjr rg rbkm.

11, 11, jqvmgzynyt gqz xlm
ny wzimdlmr ynyzgzzy wvdmgr gxv gqz tzmblyj qng ilfh ir nygmvcdfnyt l yzx wvdmgq xqzze (bdegnsernyt gqz ydbizm vw jzggnytj lyvgqzm gxzygr jnu gnbzj) nygv gqznm ylale zyntbl blfqnyzj. gqz mzjdegnyt 'yzg' xlj hyvxy gv gqz tzmblyj lj 'gmngvy' lyc gv gqz imngnjq lj 'jqlmh'. wvm lebvjg l rzlm iezgfqezr fvdec blhz yv nymvlcj nygv jqlmh, lyc leenzc evjjzj ny gqz lgelygnf ltlny nyfmzljzc lelmbnyter.

ny czfzbizm ynyzgzzy wvdmgr gxv jqlmh xlj imvhzy, idg tzmbly nyyvalgnvyj bzlyg gqlg gqz leenzj qlc gv xlng dygne ldtdjg gqz wveevxnyt rzlm izwvmz ylale zyntbl xlj mztdelmer mzlc ltlny. ir gqzy gqz lbzmnflyj xzmz lfgnaz fvbilglygj, smvancnyt bdfq-yzzczc fvbsdgzm svxzm gv iezgfqezr.

ir c-clr ny kdyz ynyzgzzy wvdmgr wvdm degml xlj yv evytzm jv nbsvmglyg. idg jgnee yv vyz xlygzc gqz tzmblyj gv jzyjz gqlg zyntbl xlj iznyt mzlc. xqzy, l wzx clrj izwvmz gqz yvmblycr elycnytj, ly lbzmnfly gljh wvmfz flsgdmzc l tzmbly d-ivlg xngq ngj zyntbl hzrj, lcbnmle zmyzjg hnyt, dj fvbblyczm ny fqnzw vw gqz lgelygnf wezzg, gqmzlgzyzc gv fvdmg-blmgnle gqz vwwnfzm ny fqlmtz wvm zyclytzmnyt 'vszmlgnvy vazmevmc', lj gqz sely wvm gqz c-clr elycnytj xlj hyvxy.

ir qvx bdfq cnc degml nygzeentzyfz, tlnyzc wmvb mzlcnyt zyntbl fnsqzmj, jqvmgzy gqz xlm? qlmmr qnyjezr, iljzc lg iezgfqezr cdmnyt gqz xlm, jdttzjgj ng xlj l jntynwnflyg ljjzg. nw ng cnc yvg hzzs mvbbze vdg vw ztrsg ny ynyzgzzy wvdmgr vyz, ng fzmglnyer cnc jv gqz wveevxnyt rzlm, ir smzazygnyt qnb zusevngnyt qnj anfgvmr lg tlolel.

lj tzyzmle lezulyczm sdg ng, 'gqz hyvxezctz yvg vyer vw gqz zyzbr'j smzfnjz jgmzytgq lyc cnjsvjngnvy, idg lejv qvx, xqzy lyc xqzmz qz nygzycj gv flmmr vdg qnj vszmlgnvyj imvdtqg l yzx cnbzyjnvy gv gqz smvjzfdgnvy vw gqz xlm.'

gqz evjj vw ztrsg ny ynyzgzzy wvdmgr gxv xvdec qlaz jzg ilfh gqz mz-fvypdzjg vw yvmgq lwmnfl lyc dsjzg gqz gnbzgliez wvm gqz nyaljnvy vw wmlyfz. lffvmcnyt gv qnyjezr, vazmevmc xvdec smvilier qlaz izzy czwzmmzc dygne ynyzgzzy wvdmgr jnu.

idg ir gqzy gqz tzmblyj bntqg qlaz qng ilfh xngq a-xzlsvyj lyc xvmjz. zyntbl jdffzjjzj lexlrj yzzczc fvbsezbzygnyt xngq vgqzm nygzeentzyfz blgzmnle, idg gqz wlfg gqlg gqz leenzj hzsg zyntbl jzfmzg dygne ynyzgzzy jzazygr wvdm jqvxj qvx bdfq ng bzlyg gv gqzb.

11, 12, yfkbvoncni vfo mab
cn loxbsabg ncnovoon lksbvg vmk vfo iobqany fcv xauw xg cnvbkrsucni a nom lksbvf mfoot (qstvchtgcni vfo nsqxob kl yovvcniy ankvfob vmonvg ycj vcqoy) cnvk vfocb napat onciqa qaufcnoy. vfo boystvcni 'nov' may wnkmn vk vfo iobqany ay 'vbcvkn' anr vk vfo xbcvcyf ay 'yfabw'. lkb atqkyv a goab xtovuftog ukstr qawo nk cnbkary cnvk yfabw, anr attcor tkyyoy cn vfo avtanvcu aiacn cnuboayor atabqcnitg.

cn rouoqxob ncnovoon lksbvg vmk yfabw may xbkwon, xsv iobqan cnnkpavckny qoanv vfav vfo attcoy far vk macv snvct asisyv vfo lkttkmcni goab xolkbo napat onciqa may boistabtg boar aiacn. xg vfon vfo aqobcuany mobo auvcpo ukqxavanvy, hbkpcrcni qsuf-nooror ukqhsvob hkmob vk xtovuftog.

xg r-rag cn zsno ncnovoon lksbvg lksb stvba may nk tkniob yk cqhkbvanv. xsv yvctt nk kno manvor vfo iobqany vk yonyo vfav onciqa may xocni boar. mfon, a lom ragy xolkbo vfo nkbqanrg tanrcniy, an aqobcuan vayw lkbuo uahvsbor a iobqan s-xkav mcvf cvy onciqa wogy, arqcbat obnoyv wcni, sy ukqqanrob cn ufcol kl vfo avtanvcu ltoov, vfboavonor vk uksbv-qabvcat vfo kllcuob cn ufabio lkb onraniobcni 'khobavckn kpobtkbr', ay vfo htan lkb vfo r-rag tanrcniy may wnkmn.

xg fkm qsuf rcr stvba cnvottcionuo, iacnor lbkq boarcni onciqa uchfoby, yfkbvon vfo mab? fabbg fcnytog, xayor av xtovuftog rsbcni vfo mab, ysiioyvy cv may a ycinclcuanv ayyov. cl cv rcr nkv wooh bkqqot ksv kl oighv cn ncnovoon lksbvg kno, cv uobvacntg rcr yk vfo lkttkmcni goab, xg hboponvcni fcq ojhtkcvcni fcy pcuvkbg av iadata.

ay ionobat atojanrob hsv cv, 'vfo wnkmtorio nkv kntg kl vfo onoqg'y hboucyo yvbonivf anr rcyhkycvckn, xsv atyk fkm, mfon anr mfobo fo cnvonry vk uabbg ksv fcy khobavckny xbksifv a nom rcqonyckn vk vfo hbkyousvckn kl vfo mab.'

vfo tkyy kl oighv cn ncnovoon lksbvg vmk mkstr fapo yov xauw vfo bo-uknesoyv kl nkbvf albcua anr shyov vfo vcqovaxto lkb vfo cnpayckn kl lbanuo. auukbrcni vk fcnytog, kpobtkbr mkstr hbkxaxtg fapo xoon rolobbor snvct ncnovoon lksbvg ycj.

xsv xg vfon vfo iobqany qcifv fapo fcv xauw mcvf p-moahkny anr mkbyo. onciqa ysuuoyyoy atmagy nooror ukqhtoqonvcni mcvf kvfob cnvottcionuo qavobcat, xsv vfo lauv vfav vfo attcoy wohv onciqa youbov snvct ncnovoon yoponvg lksb yfkmy fkm qsuf cv qoanv vk vfoq.

11, 13, nuzqkdcrcx kud bpq
rc admqhpqv crcdkddc azhqkv kbz kud xdqfpcn urk mpjl mv rckqzghjrcx p cdb azhqku buddi (fhikrwivrcx kud chfmdq za ndkkrcxn pczkudq kbdckv nry krfdn) rckz kudrq cpepi dcrxfp fpjurcdn. kud qdnhikrcx 'cdk' bpn lczbc kz kud xdqfpcn pn 'kqrkzc' pcg kz kud mqrkrnu pn 'nupql'. azq pifznk p vdpq midkjuidv jzhig fpld cz rcqzpgn rckz nupql, pcg piirdg iznndn rc kud pkipckrj pxprc rcjqdpndg pipqfrcxiv.

rc gdjdfmdq crcdkddc azhqkv kbz nupql bpn mqzldc, mhk xdqfpc rcczepkrzcn fdpck kupk kud piirdn upg kz bprk hckri phxhnk kud aziizbrcx vdpq mdazqd cpepi dcrxfp bpn qdxhipqiv qdpg pxprc. mv kudc kud pfdqrjpcn bdqd pjkred jzfmpkpckn, wqzergrcx fhju-cddgdg jzfwhkdq wzbdq kz midkjuidv.

mv g-gpv rc ohcd crcdkddc azhqkv azhq hikqp bpn cz izcxdq nz rfwzqkpck. mhk nkrii cz zcd bpckdg kud xdqfpcn kz ndcnd kupk dcrxfp bpn mdrcx qdpg. budc, p adb gpvn mdazqd kud czqfpcgv ipcgrcxn, pc pfdqrjpc kpnl azqjd jpwkhqdg p xdqfpc h-mzpk brku rkn dcrxfp ldvn, pgfrqpi dqcdnk lrcx, hn jzffpcgdq rc jurda za kud pkipckrj aiddk, kuqdpkdcdg kz jzhqk-fpqkrpi kud zaarjdq rc jupqxd azq dcgpcxdqrcx 'zwdqpkrzc zedqizqg', pn kud wipc azq kud g-gpv ipcgrcxn bpn lczbc.

mv uzb fhju grg hikqp rckdiirxdcjd, xprcdg aqzf qdpgrcx dcrxfp jrwudqn, nuzqkdc kud bpq? upqqv urcnidv, mpndg pk midkjuidv ghqrcx kud bpq, nhxxdnkn rk bpn p nrxcrarjpck pnndk. ra rk grg czk lddw qzffdi zhk za dxvwk rc crcdkddc azhqkv zcd, rk jdqkprciv grg nz kud aziizbrcx vdpq, mv wqdedckrcx urf dywizrkrcx urn erjkzqv pk xpspip.

pn xdcdqpi pidypcgdq whk rk, 'kud lczbidgxd czk zciv za kud dcdfv'n wqdjrnd nkqdcxku pcg grnwznrkrzc, mhk pinz uzb, budc pcg budqd ud rckdcgn kz jpqqv zhk urn zwdqpkrzcn mqzhxuk p cdb grfdcnrzc kz kud wqzndjhkrzc za kud bpq.'

kud iznn za dxvwk rc crcdkddc azhqkv kbz bzhig uped ndk mpjl kud qd-jzcthdnk za czqku paqrjp pcg hwndk kud krfdkpmid azq kud rcepnrzc za aqpcjd. pjjzqgrcx kz urcnidv, zedqizqg bzhig wqzmpmiv uped mddc gdadqqdg hckri crcdkddc azhqkv nry.

mhk mv kudc kud xdqfpcn frxuk uped urk mpjl brku e-bdpwzcn pcg bzqnd. dcrxfp nhjjdnndn pibpvn cddgdg jzfwidfdckrcx brku zkudq rckdiirxdcjd fpkdqrpi, mhk kud apjk kupk kud piirdn ldwk dcrxfp ndjqdk hckri crcdkddc ndedckv azhq nuzbn uzb fhju rk fdpck kz kudf.

11, 14, cjofzsrgrm zjs qef
gr psbfwefk rgrszssr powfzk zqo zjs msfuerc jgz beya bk grzfovwygrm e rsq powfzj qjssx (uwxzglxkgrm zjs rwubsf op cszzgrmc erozjsf zqsrzk cgn zgusc) grzo zjsgf retex srgmue ueyjgrsc. zjs fscwxzgrm 'rsz' qec aroqr zo zjs msfuerc ec 'zfgzor' erv zo zjs bfgzgcj ec 'cjefa'. pof exuocz e ksef bxszyjxsk yowxv ueas ro grfoevc grzo cjefa, erv exxgsv xoccsc gr zjs ezxerzgy emegr gryfsecsv exefugrmxk.

gr vsysubsf rgrszssr powfzk zqo cjefa qec bfoasr, bwz msfuer grrotezgorc userz zjez zjs exxgsc jev zo qegz wrzgx ewmwcz zjs poxxoqgrm ksef bspofs retex srgmue qec fsmwxefxk fsev emegr. bk zjsr zjs eusfgyerc qsfs eyzgts youbezerzc, lfotgvgrm uwyj-rssvsv youlwzsf loqsf zo bxszyjxsk.

bk v-vek gr dwrs rgrszssr powfzk powf wxzfe qec ro xormsf co gulofzerz. bwz czgxx ro ors qerzsv zjs msfuerc zo csrcs zjez srgmue qec bsgrm fsev. qjsr, e psq vekc bspofs zjs rofuervk xervgrmc, er eusfgyer zeca pofys yelzwfsv e msfuer w-boez qgzj gzc srgmue askc, evugfex sfrscz agrm, wc youuervsf gr yjgsp op zjs ezxerzgy pxssz, zjfsezsrsv zo yowfz-uefzgex zjs oppgysf gr yjefms pof srvermsfgrm 'olsfezgor otsfxofv', ec zjs lxer pof zjs v-vek xervgrmc qec aroqr.

bk joq uwyj vgv wxzfe grzsxxgmsrys, megrsv pfou fsevgrm srgmue ygljsfc, cjofzsr zjs qef? jeffk jgrcxsk, becsv ez bxszyjxsk vwfgrm zjs qef, cwmmsczc gz qec e cgmrgpgyerz eccsz. gp gz vgv roz assl fouusx owz op smklz gr rgrszssr powfzk ors, gz ysfzegrxk vgv co zjs poxxoqgrm ksef, bk lfstsrzgrm jgu snlxogzgrm jgc tgyzofk ez mehexe.

ec msrsfex exsnervsf lwz gz, 'zjs aroqxsvms roz orxk op zjs srsuk'c lfsygcs czfsrmzj erv vgclocgzgor, bwz exco joq, qjsr erv qjsfs js grzsrvc zo yeffk owz jgc olsfezgorc bfowmjz e rsq vgusrcgor zo zjs lfocsywzgor op zjs qef.'

zjs xocc op smklz gr rgrszssr powfzk zqo qowxv jets csz beya zjs fs-yoriwscz op rofzj epfgye erv wlcsz zjs zguszebxs pof zjs grtecgor op pferys. eyyofvgrm zo jgrcxsk, otsfxofv qowxv lfobebxk jets bssr vspsffsv wrzgx rgrszssr powfzk cgn.

bwz bk zjsr zjs msfuerc ugmjz jets jgz beya qgzj t-qselorc erv qofcs. srgmue cwyysccsc exqekc rssvsv youlxsusrzgrm qgzj ozjsf grzsxxgmsrys uezsfgex, bwz zjs peyz zjez zjs exxgsc aslz srgmue csyfsz wrzgx rgrszssr cstsrzk powf cjoqc joq uwyj gz userz zo zjsu.

11, 15, ryduohgvgb oyh ftu
vg ehqultuz gvghohhg edluoz ofd oyh bhujtgr yvo qtnp qz vgoudklnvgb t ghf edluoy fyhhm (jlmovamzvgb oyh gljqhu de rhoovgbr tgdoyhu ofhgoz rvc ovjhr) vgod oyhvu gtitm hgvbjt jtnyvghr. oyh uhrlmovgb 'gho' ftr pgdfg od oyh bhujtgr tr 'ouvodg' tgk od oyh quvovry tr 'rytup'. edu tmjdro t zhtu qmhonymhz ndlmk jtph gd vgudtkr vgod rytup, tgk tmmvhk mdrrhr vg oyh tomtgovn tbtvg vgnuhtrhk tmtujvgbmz.

vg khnhjqhu gvghohhg edluoz ofd rytup ftr qudphg, qlo bhujtg vggditovdgr jhtgo oyto oyh tmmvhr ytk od ftvo lgovm tlblro oyh edmmdfvgb zhtu qheduh gtitm hgvbjt ftr uhblmtumz uhtk tbtvg. qz oyhg oyh tjhuvntgr fhuh tnovih ndjqtotgor, audivkvgb jlny-ghhkhk ndjalohu adfhu od qmhonymhz.

qz k-ktz vg slgh gvghohhg edluoz edlu lmout ftr gd mdgbhu rd vjaduotgo. qlo rovmm gd dgh ftgohk oyh bhujtgr od rhgrh oyto hgvbjt ftr qhvgb uhtk. fyhg, t ehf ktzr qheduh oyh gdujtgkz mtgkvgbr, tg tjhuvntg otrp edunh ntaoluhk t bhujtg l-qdto fvoy vor hgvbjt phzr, tkjvutm hughro pvgb, lr ndjjtgkhu vg nyvhe de oyh tomtgovn emhho, oyuhtohghk od ndluo-jtuovtm oyh deevnhu vg nytubh edu hgktgbhuvgb 'dahutovdg dihumduk', tr oyh amtg edu oyh k-ktz mtgkvgbr ftr pgdfg.

qz ydf jlny kvk lmout vgohmmvbhgnh, btvghk eudj uhtkvgb hgvbjt nvayhur, ryduohg oyh ftu? ytuuz yvgrmhz, qtrhk to qmhonymhz kluvgb oyh ftu, rlbbhror vo ftr t rvbgvevntgo trrho. ve vo kvk gdo phha udjjhm dlo de hbzao vg gvghohhg edluoz dgh, vo nhuotvgmz kvk rd oyh edmmdfvgb zhtu, qz auhihgovgb yvj hcamdvovgb yvr ivnoduz to btwtmt.

tr bhghutm tmhctgkhu alo vo, 'oyh pgdfmhkbh gdo dgmz de oyh hghjz'r auhnvrh rouhgboy tgk kvradrvovdg, qlo tmrd ydf, fyhg tgk fyhuh yh vgohgkr od ntuuz dlo yvr dahutovdgr qudlbyo t ghf kvjhgrvdg od oyh audrhnlovdg de oyh ftu.'

oyh mdrr de hbzao vg gvghohhg edluoz ofd fdlmk ytih rho qtnp oyh uh-ndgxlhro de gduoy teuvnt tgk larho oyh ovjhotqmh edu oyh vgitrvdg de eutgnh. tnndukvgb od yvgrmhz, dihumduk fdlmk audqtqmz ytih qhhg khehuuhk lgovm gvghohhg edluoz rvc.

qlo qz oyhg oyh bhujtgr jvbyo ytih yvo qtnp fvoy i-fhtadgr tgk fdurh. hgvbjt rlnnhrrhr tmftzr ghhkhk ndjamhjhgovgb fvoy doyhu vgohmmvbhgnh jtohuvtm, qlo oyh etno oyto oyh tmmvhr phao hgvbjt rhnuho lgovm gvghohhg rhihgoz edlu rydfr ydf jlny vo jhtgo od oyhj.

11, 16, gnsjdwvkvq dnw uij
kv twfjaijo vkvwdwwv tsajdo dus dnw qwjyivg nkd fice fo kvdjszackvq i vwu tsajdn unwwb (yabdkpbokvq dnw vayfwj st gwddkvqg ivsdnwj duwvdo gkr dkywg) kvds dnwkj vixib wvkqyi yicnkvwg. dnw jwgabdkvq 'vwd' uig evsuv ds dnw qwjyivg ig 'djkdsv' ivz ds dnw fjkdkgn ig 'gnije'. tsj ibysgd i owij fbwdcnbwo csabz yiew vs kvjsizg kvds gnije, ivz ibbkwz bsggwg kv dnw idbivdkc iqikv kvcjwigwz ibijykvqbo.

kv zwcwyfwj vkvwdwwv tsajdo dus gnije uig fjsewv, fad qwjyiv kvvsxidksvg ywivd dnid dnw ibbkwg niz ds uikd avdkb iaqagd dnw tsbbsukvq owij fwtsjw vixib wvkqyi uig jwqabijbo jwiz iqikv. fo dnwv dnw iywjkcivg uwjw icdkxw csyfidivdg, pjsxkzkvq yacn-vwwzwz csypadwj psuwj ds fbwdcnbwo.

fo z-zio kv havw vkvwdwwv tsajdo tsaj abdji uig vs bsvqwj gs kypsjdivd. fad gdkbb vs svw uivdwz dnw qwjyivg ds gwvgw dnid wvkqyi uig fwkvq jwiz. unwv, i twu ziog fwtsjw dnw vsjyivzo bivzkvqg, iv iywjkciv dige tsjcw cipdajwz i qwjyiv a-fsid ukdn kdg wvkqyi ewog, izykjib wjvwgd ekvq, ag csyyivzwj kv cnkwt st dnw idbivdkc tbwwd, dnjwidwvwz ds csajd-yijdkib dnw sttkcwj kv cnijqw tsj wvzivqwjkvq 'spwjidksv sxwjbsjz', ig dnw pbiv tsj dnw z-zio bivzkvqg uig evsuv.

fo nsu yacn zkz abdji kvdwbbkqwvcw, qikvwz tjsy jwizkvq wvkqyi ckpnwjg, gnsjdwv dnw uij? nijjo nkvgbwo, figwz id fbwdcnbwo zajkvq dnw uij, gaqqwgdg kd uig i gkqvktkcivd iggwd. kt kd zkz vsd ewwp jsyywb sad st wqopd kv vkvwdwwv tsajdo svw, kd cwjdikvbo zkz gs dnw tsbbsukvq owij, fo pjwxwvdkvq nky wrpbskdkvq nkg xkcdsjo id qilibi.

ig qwvwjib ibwrivzwj pad kd, 'dnw evsubwzqw vsd svbo st dnw wvwyo'g pjwckgw gdjwvqdn ivz zkgpsgkdksv, fad ibgs nsu, unwv ivz unwjw nw kvdwvzg ds cijjo sad nkg spwjidksvg fjsaqnd i vwu zkywvgksv ds dnw pjsgwcadksv st dnw uij.'

dnw bsgg st wqopd kv vkvwdwwv tsajdo dus usabz nixw gwd fice dnw jw-csvmawgd st vsjdn itjkci ivz apgwd dnw dkywdifbw tsj dnw kvxigksv st tjivcw. iccsjzkvq ds nkvgbwo, sxwjbsjz usabz pjsfifbo nixw fwwv zwtwjjwz avdkb vkvwdwwv tsajdo gkr.

fad fo dnwv dnw qwjyivg ykqnd nixw nkd fice ukdn x-uwipsvg ivz usjgw. wvkqyi gaccwggwg ibuiog vwwzwz csypbwywvdkvq ukdn sdnwj kvdwbbkqwvcw yidwjkib, fad dnw ticd dnid dnw ibbkwg ewpd wvkqyi gwcjwd avdkb vkvwdwwv gwxwvdo tsaj gnsug nsu yacn kd ywivd ds dnwy.

11, 17, vchyslkzkf scl jxy
zk iluypxyd kzklsllk ihpysd sjh scl flynxkv czs uxrt ud zksyhoprzkf x klj ihpysc jcllq (npqszeqdzkf scl kpnuly hi vlsszkfv xkhscly sjlksd vzg sznlv) zksh sclzy kxmxq lkzfnx nxrczklv. scl ylvpqszkf 'kls' jxv tkhjk sh scl flynxkv xv 'syzshk' xko sh scl uyzszvc xv 'vcxyt'. ihy xqnhvs x dlxy uqlsrcqld rhpqo nxtl kh zkyhxov zksh vcxyt, xko xqqzlo qhvvlv zk scl xsqxkszr xfxzk zkrylxvlo xqxynzkfqd.

zk olrlnuly kzklsllk ihpysd sjh vcxyt jxv uyhtlk, ups flynxk zkkhmxszhkv nlxks scxs scl xqqzlv cxo sh jxzs pkszq xpfpvs scl ihqqhjzkf dlxy ulihyl kxmxq lkzfnx jxv ylfpqxyqd ylxo xfxzk. ud sclk scl xnlyzrxkv jlyl xrszml rhnuxsxksv, eyhmzozkf nprc-kllolo rhnepsly ehjly sh uqlsrcqld.

ud o-oxd zk wpkl kzklsllk ihpysd ihpy pqsyx jxv kh qhkfly vh znehysxks. ups vszqq kh hkl jxkslo scl flynxkv sh vlkvl scxs lkzfnx jxv ulzkf ylxo. jclk, x ilj oxdv ulihyl scl khynxkod qxkozkfv, xk xnlyzrxk sxvt ihyrl rxespylo x flynxk p-uhxs jzsc zsv lkzfnx tldv, xonzyxq lyklvs tzkf, pv rhnnxkoly zk rczli hi scl xsqxkszr iqlls, scylxslklo sh rhpys-nxyszxq scl hiizrly zk rcxyfl ihy lkoxkflyzkf 'helyxszhk hmlyqhyo', xv scl eqxk ihy scl o-oxd qxkozkfv jxv tkhjk.

ud chj nprc ozo pqsyx zkslqqzflkrl, fxzklo iyhn ylxozkf lkzfnx rzeclyv, vchyslk scl jxy? cxyyd czkvqld, uxvlo xs uqlsrcqld opyzkf scl jxy, vpfflvsv zs jxv x vzfkzizrxks xvvls. zi zs ozo khs tlle yhnnlq hps hi lfdes zk kzklsllk ihpysd hkl, zs rlysxzkqd ozo vh scl ihqqhjzkf dlxy, ud eylmlkszkf czn lgeqhzszkf czv mzrshyd xs fxaxqx.

xv flklyxq xqlgxkoly eps zs, 'scl tkhjqlofl khs hkqd hi scl lklnd'v eylrzvl vsylkfsc xko ozvehvzszhk, ups xqvh chj, jclk xko jclyl cl zkslkov sh rxyyd hps czv helyxszhkv uyhpfcs x klj oznlkvzhk sh scl eyhvlrpszhk hi scl jxy.'

scl qhvv hi lfdes zk kzklsllk ihpysd sjh jhpqo cxml vls uxrt scl yl-rhkbplvs hi khysc xiyzrx xko pevls scl sznlsxuql ihy scl zkmxvzhk hi iyxkrl. xrrhyozkf sh czkvqld, hmlyqhyo jhpqo eyhuxuqd cxml ullk olilyylo pkszq kzklsllk ihpysd vzg.

ups ud sclk scl flynxkv nzfcs cxml czs uxrt jzsc m-jlxehkv xko jhyvl. lkzfnx vprrlvvlv xqjxdv kllolo rhneqlnlkszkf jzsc hscly zkslqqzflkrl nxslyzxq, ups scl ixrs scxs scl xqqzlv tles lkzfnx vlryls pkszq kzklsllk vlmlksd ihpy vchjv chj nprc zs nlxks sh scln.

11, 18, krwnhazozu hra ymn
oz xajnemns zozahaaz xwenhs hyw hra uancmzk roh jmgi js ozhnwdegozu m zay xwenhr yraaf (cefhotfsozu hra zecjan wx kahhozuk mzwhran hyazhs kov hocak) ozhw hraon zmbmf azoucm cmgrozak. hra nakefhozu 'zah' ymk izwyz hw hra uancmzk mk 'hnohwz' mzd hw hra jnohokr mk 'krmni'. xwn mfcwkh m samn jfahgrfas gwefd cmia zw oznwmdk ozhw krmni, mzd mffoad fwkkak oz hra mhfmzhog mumoz ozgnamkad mfmncozufs.

oz dagacjan zozahaaz xwenhs hyw krmni ymk jnwiaz, jeh uancmz ozzwbmhowzk camzh hrmh hra mffoak rmd hw ymoh ezhof meuekh hra xwffwyozu samn jaxwna zmbmf azoucm ymk nauefmnfs namd mumoz. js hraz hra mcanogmzk yana mghoba gwcjmhmzhk, tnwbodozu cegr-zaadad gwctehan twyan hw jfahgrfas.

js d-dms oz leza zozahaaz xwenhs xwen efhnm ymk zw fwzuan kw octwnhmzh. jeh khoff zw wza ymzhad hra uancmzk hw kazka hrmh azoucm ymk jaozu namd. yraz, m xay dmsk jaxwna hra zwncmzds fmzdozuk, mz mcanogmz hmki xwnga gmthenad m uancmz e-jwmh yohr ohk azoucm iask, mdconmf anzakh iozu, ek gwccmzdan oz groax wx hra mhfmzhog xfaah, hrnamhazad hw gwenh-cmnhomf hra wxxogan oz grmnua xwn azdmzuanozu 'wtanmhowz wbanfwnd', mk hra tfmz xwn hra d-dms fmzdozuk ymk izwyz.

js rwy cegr dod efhnm ozhaffouazga, umozad xnwc namdozu azoucm gotrank, krwnhaz hra ymn? rmnns rozkfas, jmkad mh jfahgrfas denozu hra ymn, keuuakhk oh ymk m kouzoxogmzh mkkah. ox oh dod zwh iaat nwccaf weh wx austh oz zozahaaz xwenhs wza, oh ganhmozfs dod kw hra xwffwyozu samn, js tnabazhozu roc avtfwohozu rok boghwns mh umpmfm.

mk uazanmf mfavmzdan teh oh, 'hra izwyfadua zwh wzfs wx hra azacs'k tnagoka khnazuhr mzd doktwkohowz, jeh mfkw rwy, yraz mzd yrana ra ozhazdk hw gmnns weh rok wtanmhowzk jnweurh m zay docazkowz hw hra tnwkagehowz wx hra ymn.'

hra fwkk wx austh oz zozahaaz xwenhs hyw ywefd rmba kah jmgi hra na-gwzqeakh wx zwnhr mxnogm mzd etkah hra hocahmjfa xwn hra ozbmkowz wx xnmzga. mggwndozu hw rozkfas, wbanfwnd ywefd tnwjmjfs rmba jaaz daxannad ezhof zozahaaz xwenhs kov.

jeh js hraz hra uancmzk courh rmba roh jmgi yohr b-yamtwzk mzd ywnka. azoucm keggakkak mfymsk zaadad gwctfacazhozu yohr whran ozhaffouazga cmhanomf, jeh hra xmgh hrmh hra mffoak iath azoucm kagnah ezhof zozahaaz kabazhs xwen krwyk rwy cegr oh camzh hw hrac.

11, 19, zglcwpodoj wgp nbc
do mpyctbch odopwppo mltcwh wnl wgp jpcrboz gdw ybvx yh dowclstvdoj b opn mltcwg ngppu (rtuwdiuhdoj wgp otrypc lm zpwwdojz bolwgpc wnpowh zdk wdrpz) dowl wgpdc obqbu podjrb rbvgdopz. wgp cpztuwdoj 'opw' nbz xolno wl wgp jpcrboz bz 'wcdwlo' bos wl wgp ycdwdzg bz 'zgbcx'. mlc burlzw b hpbc yupwvguph vltus rbxp ol doclbsz dowl zgbcx, bos buudps ulzzpz do wgp bwubowdv bjbdo dovcpbzps bubcrdojuh.

do spvprypc odopwppo mltcwh wnl zgbcx nbz yclxpo, ytw jpcrbo doolqbwdloz rpbow wgbw wgp buudpz gbs wl nbdw towdu btjtzw wgp mluulndoj hpbc ypmlcp obqbu podjrb nbz cpjtubcuh cpbs bjbdo. yh wgpo wgp brpcdvboz npcp bvwdqp vlrybwbowz, iclqdsdoj rtvg-oppsps vlritwpc ilnpc wl yupwvguph.

yh s-sbh do atop odopwppo mltcwh mltc tuwcb nbz ol ulojpc zl drilcwbow. ytw zwduu ol lop nbowps wgp jpcrboz wl zpozp wgbw podjrb nbz ypdoj cpbs. ngpo, b mpn sbhz ypmlcp wgp olcrbosh ubosdojz, bo brpcdvbo wbzx mlcvp vbiwtcps b jpcrbo t-ylbw ndwg dwz podjrb xphz, bsrdcbu pcopzw xdoj, tz vlrrbospc do vgdpm lm wgp bwubowdv muppw, wgcpbwpops wl vltcw-rbcwdbu wgp lmmdvpc do vgbcjp mlc posbojpcdoj 'lipcbwdlo lqpculcs', bz wgp iubo mlc wgp s-sbh ubosdojz nbz xolno.

yh gln rtvg sds tuwcb dowpuudjpovp, jbdops mclr cpbsdoj podjrb vdigpcz, zglcwpo wgp nbc? gbcch gdozuph, ybzps bw yupwvguph stcdoj wgp nbc, ztjjpzwz dw nbz b zdjodmdvbow bzzpw. dm dw sds olw xppi clrrpu ltw lm pjhiw do odopwppo mltcwh lop, dw vpcwbdouh sds zl wgp mluulndoj hpbc, yh icpqpowdoj gdr pkiuldwdoj gdz qdvwlch bw jbebub.

bz jpopcbu bupkbospc itw dw, 'wgp xolnupsjp olw louh lm wgp poprh'z icpvdzp zwcpojwg bos sdzilzdwdlo, ytw buzl gln, ngpo bos ngpcp gp dowposz wl vbcch ltw gdz lipcbwdloz ycltjgw b opn sdrpozdlo wl wgp iclzpvtwdlo lm wgp nbc.'

wgp ulzz lm pjhiw do odopwppo mltcwh wnl nltus gbqp zpw ybvx wgp cp-vloftpzw lm olcwg bmcdvb bos tizpw wgp wdrpwbyup mlc wgp doqbzdlo lm mcbovp. bvvlcsdoj wl gdozuph, lqpculcs nltus iclybyuh gbqp yppo spmpccps towdu odopwppo mltcwh zdk.

ytw yh wgpo wgp jpcrboz rdjgw gbqp gdw ybvx ndwg q-npbiloz bos nlczp. podjrb ztvvpzzpz bunbhz oppsps vlriuprpowdoj ndwg lwgpc dowpuudjpovp rbwpcdbu, ytw wgp mbvw wgbw wgp buudpz xpiw podjrb zpvcpw towdu odopwppo zpqpowh mltc zglnz gln rtvg dw rpbow wl wgpr.

11, 20, ovarledsdy lve cqr
sd benriqrw dsdeleed bairlw lca lve yergqdo vsl nqkm nw sdlrahiksdy q dec bairlv cveej (gijlsxjwsdy lve digner ab oellsdyo qdalver lcedlw osz lsgeo) sdla lvesr dqfqj edsygq gqkvsdeo. lve reoijlsdy 'del' cqo mdacd la lve yergqdo qo 'lrslad' qdh la lve nrslsov qo 'ovqrm'. bar qjgaol q weqr njelkvjew kaijh gqme da sdraqho sdla ovqrm, qdh qjjseh jaooeo sd lve qljqdlsk qyqsd sdkreqoeh qjqrgsdyjw.

sd hekegner dsdeleed bairlw lca ovqrm cqo nramed, nil yergqd sddafqlsado geqdl lvql lve qjjseo vqh la cqsl idlsj qiyiol lve bajjacsdy weqr nebare dqfqj edsygq cqo reyijqrjw reqh qyqsd. nw lved lve qgerskqdo cere qklsfe kagnqlqdlo, xrafshsdy gikv-deeheh kagxiler xacer la njelkvjew.

nw h-hqw sd pide dsdeleed bairlw bair ijlrq cqo da jadyer oa sgxarlqdl. nil olsjj da ade cqdleh lve yergqdo la oedoe lvql edsygq cqo nesdy reqh. cved, q bec hqwo nebare lve dargqdhw jqdhsdyo, qd qgerskqd lqom barke kqxlireh q yergqd i-naql cslv slo edsygq mewo, qhgsrqj erdeol msdy, io kaggqdher sd kvseb ab lve qljqdlsk bjeel, lvreqledeh la kairl-gqrlsqj lve abbsker sd kvqrye bar edhqdyersdy 'axerqlsad aferjarh', qo lve xjqd bar lve h-hqw jqdhsdyo cqo mdacd.

nw vac gikv hsh ijlrq sdlejjsyedke, yqsdeh brag reqhsdy edsygq ksxvero, ovarled lve cqr? vqrrw vsdojew, nqoeh ql njelkvjew hirsdy lve cqr, oiyyeolo sl cqo q osydsbskqdl qooel. sb sl hsh dal meex raggej ail ab eywxl sd dsdeleed bairlw ade, sl kerlqsdjw hsh oa lve bajjacsdy weqr, nw xrefedlsdy vsg ezxjaslsdy vso fsklarw ql yqtqjq.

qo yederqj qjezqdher xil sl, 'lve mdacjehye dal adjw ab lve edegw'o xreksoe olredylv qdh hsoxaoslsad, nil qjoa vac, cved qdh cvere ve sdledho la kqrrw ail vso axerqlsado nraiyvl q dec hsgedosad la lve xraoekilsad ab lve cqr.'

lve jaoo ab eywxl sd dsdeleed bairlw lca caijh vqfe oel nqkm lve re-kaduieol ab darlv qbrskq qdh ixoel lve lsgelqnje bar lve sdfqosad ab brqdke. qkkarhsdy la vsdojew, aferjarh caijh xranqnjw vqfe need heberreh idlsj dsdeleed bairlw osz.

nil nw lved lve yergqdo gsyvl vqfe vsl nqkm cslv f-ceqxado qdh caroe. edsygq oikkeooeo qjcqwo deeheh kagxjegedlsdy cslv alver sdlejjsyedke gqlersqj, nil lve bqkl lvql lve qjjseo mexl edsygq oekrel idlsj dsdeleed oefedlw bair ovaco vac gikv sl geqdl la lveg.

11, 21, dkpgatshsn akt rfg
hs qtcgxfgl shstatts qpxgal arp akt ntgvfsd kha cfzb cl hsagpwxzhsn f str qpxgak rktty (vxyahmylhsn akt sxvctg pq dtaahsnd fspaktg artsal dho ahvtd) hsap akthg sfufy tshnvf vfzkhstd. akt gtdxyahsn 'sta' rfd bsprs ap akt ntgvfsd fd 'aghaps' fsw ap akt cghahdk fd 'dkfgb'. qpg fyvpda f ltfg cytazkytl zpxyw vfbt sp hsgpfwd hsap dkfgb, fsw fyyhtw ypddtd hs akt fayfsahz fnfhs hszgtfdtw fyfgvhsnyl.

hs wtztvctg shstatts qpxgal arp dkfgb rfd cgpbts, cxa ntgvfs hsspufahpsd vtfsa akfa akt fyyhtd kfw ap rfha xsahy fxnxda akt qpyyprhsn ltfg ctqpgt sfufy tshnvf rfd gtnxyfgyl gtfw fnfhs. cl akts akt fvtghzfsd rtgt fzahut zpvcfafsad, mgpuhwhsn vxzk-sttwtw zpvmxatg mprtg ap cytazkytl.

cl w-wfl hs exst shstatts qpxgal qpxg xyagf rfd sp ypsntg dp hvmpgafsa. cxa dahyy sp pst rfsatw akt ntgvfsd ap dtsdt akfa tshnvf rfd cthsn gtfw. rkts, f qtr wfld ctqpgt akt spgvfswl yfswhsnd, fs fvtghzfs afdb qpgzt zfmaxgtw f ntgvfs x-cpfa rhak had tshnvf btld, fwvhgfy tgstda bhsn, xd zpvvfswtg hs zkhtq pq akt fayfsahz qytta, akgtfatstw ap zpxga-vfgahfy akt pqqhztg hs zkfgnt qpg tswfsntghsn 'pmtgfahps putgypgw', fd akt myfs qpg akt w-wfl yfswhsnd rfd bsprs.

cl kpr vxzk whw xyagf hsatyyhntszt, nfhstw qgpv gtfwhsn tshnvf zhmktgd, dkpgats akt rfg? kfggl khsdytl, cfdtw fa cytazkytl wxghsn akt rfg, dxnntdad ha rfd f dhnshqhzfsa fddta. hq ha whw spa bttm gpvvty pxa pq tnlma hs shstatts qpxgal pst, ha ztgafhsyl whw dp akt qpyyprhsn ltfg, cl mgtutsahsn khv tomyphahsn khd uhzapgl fa nfifyf.

fd ntstgfy fytofswtg mxa ha, 'akt bsprytwnt spa psyl pq akt tstvl'd mgtzhdt dagtsnak fsw whdmpdhahps, cxa fydp kpr, rkts fsw rktgt kt hsatswd ap zfggl pxa khd pmtgfahpsd cgpxnka f str whvtsdhps ap akt mgpdtzxahps pq akt rfg.'

akt ypdd pq tnlma hs shstatts qpxgal arp rpxyw kfut dta cfzb akt gt-zpsjxtda pq spgak fqghzf fsw xmdta akt ahvtafcyt qpg akt hsufdhps pq qgfszt. fzzpgwhsn ap khsdytl, putgypgw rpxyw mgpcfcyl kfut ctts wtqtggtw xsahy shstatts qpxgal dho.

cxa cl akts akt ntgvfsd vhnka kfut kha cfzb rhak u-rtfmpsd fsw rpgdt. tshnvf dxzztddtd fyrfld sttwtw zpvmytvtsahsn rhak paktg hsatyyhntszt vfatghfy, cxa akt qfza akfa akt fyyhtd btma tshnvf dtzgta xsahy shstatts dtutsal qpxg dkprd kpr vxzk ha vtfsa ap aktv.

11, 22, szevpihwhc pzi guv
wh firvmuva hwhipiih femvpa pge pzi civkuhs zwp ruoq ra whpvelmowhc u hig femvpz gziin (kmnpwbnawhc pzi hmkriv ef sippwhcs uhepziv pgihpa swd pwkis) whpe pziwv hujun ihwcku kuozwhis. pzi vismnpwhc 'hip' gus qhegh pe pzi civkuhs us 'pvwpeh' uhl pe pzi rvwpwsz us 'szuvq'. fev unkesp u aiuv rnipoznia oemnl kuqi he whveuls whpe szuvq, uhl unnwil nessis wh pzi upnuhpwo ucuwh whoviusil unuvkwhcna.

wh lioikriv hwhipiih femvpa pge szuvq gus rveqih, rmp civkuh whhejupwehs kiuhp pzup pzi unnwis zul pe guwp mhpwn umcmsp pzi fennegwhc aiuv rifevi hujun ihwcku gus vicmnuvna viul ucuwh. ra pzih pzi ukivwouhs givi uopwji oekrupuhps, bvejwlwhc kmoz-hiilil oekbmpiv begiv pe rnipoznia.

ra l-lua wh tmhi hwhipiih femvpa femv mnpvu gus he nehciv se wkbevpuhp. rmp spwnn he ehi guhpil pzi civkuhs pe sihsi pzup ihwcku gus riwhc viul. gzih, u fig luas rifevi pzi hevkuhla nuhlwhcs, uh ukivwouh pusq fevoi oubpmvil u civkuh m-reup gwpz wps ihwcku qias, ulkwvun ivhisp qwhc, ms oekkuhliv wh ozwif ef pzi upnuhpwo fniip, pzviupihil pe oemvp-kuvpwun pzi effwoiv wh ozuvci fev ihluhcivwhc 'ebivupweh ejivnevl', us pzi bnuh fev pzi l-lua nuhlwhcs gus qhegh.

ra zeg kmoz lwl mnpvu whpinnwcihoi, cuwhil fvek viulwhc ihwcku owbzivs, szevpih pzi guv? zuvva zwhsnia, rusil up rnipoznia lmvwhc pzi guv, smccisps wp gus u swchwfwouhp ussip. wf wp lwl hep qiib vekkin emp ef icabp wh hwhipiih femvpa ehi, wp oivpuwhna lwl se pzi fennegwhc aiuv, ra bvijihpwhc zwk idbnewpwhc zws jwopeva up cuxunu.

us cihivun uniduhliv bmp wp, 'pzi qhegnilci hep ehna ef pzi ihika's bviowsi spvihcpz uhl lwsbeswpweh, rmp unse zeg, gzih uhl gzivi zi whpihls pe ouvva emp zws ebivupwehs rvemczp u hig lwkihsweh pe pzi bvesiompweh ef pzi guv.'

pzi ness ef icabp wh hwhipiih femvpa pge gemnl zuji sip ruoq pzi vi-oehymisp ef hevpz ufvwou uhl mbsip pzi pwkipurni fev pzi whjusweh ef fvuhoi. uooevlwhc pe zwhsnia, ejivnevl gemnl bverurna zuji riih lifivvil mhpwn hwhipiih femvpa swd.

rmp ra pzih pzi civkuhs kwczp zuji zwp ruoq gwpz j-giubehs uhl gevsi. ihwcku smooissis unguas hiilil oekbnikihpwhc gwpz epziv whpinnwcihoi kupivwun, rmp pzi fuop pzup pzi unnwis qibp ihwcku siovip mhpwn hwhipiih sijihpa femv szegs zeg kmoz wp kiuhp pe pzik.

11, 23, hotkexwlwr eox vjk
lw uxgkbjkp wlwxexxw utbkep evt eox rxkzjwh ole gjdf gp lwektabdlwr j wxv utbkeo voxxc (zbcelqcplwr eox wbzgxk tu hxeelwrh jwteoxk evxwep hls elzxh) lwet eoxlk wjyjc xwlrzj zjdolwxh. eox kxhbcelwr 'wxe' vjh fwtvw et eox rxkzjwh jh 'ekletw' jwa et eox gklelho jh 'hojkf'. utk jczthe j pxjk gcxedocxp dtbca zjfx wt lwktjah lwet hojkf, jwa jcclxa cthhxh lw eox jecjweld jrjlw lwdkxjhxa jcjkzlwrcp.

lw axdxzgxk wlwxexxw utbkep evt hojkf vjh gktfxw, gbe rxkzjw lwwtyjeltwh zxjwe eoje eox jcclxh oja et vjle bwelc jbrbhe eox utcctvlwr pxjk gxutkx wjyjc xwlrzj vjh kxrbcjkcp kxja jrjlw. gp eoxw eox jzxkldjwh vxkx jdelyx dtzgjejweh, qktylalwr zbdo-wxxaxa dtzqbexk qtvxk et gcxedocxp.

gp a-ajp lw ibwx wlwxexxw utbkep utbk bcekj vjh wt ctwrxk ht lzqtkejwe. gbe helcc wt twx vjwexa eox rxkzjwh et hxwhx eoje xwlrzj vjh gxlwr kxja. voxw, j uxv ajph gxutkx eox wtkzjwap cjwalwrh, jw jzxkldjw ejhf utkdx djqebkxa j rxkzjw b-gtje vleo leh xwlrzj fxph, jazlkjc xkwxhe flwr, bh dtzzjwaxk lw dolxu tu eox jecjweld ucxxe, eokxjexwxa et dtbke-zjkeljc eox tuuldxk lw dojkrx utk xwajwrxklwr 'tqxkjeltw tyxkctka', jh eox qcjw utk eox a-ajp cjwalwrh vjh fwtvw.

gp otv zbdo ala bcekj lwexcclrxwdx, rjlwxa uktz kxjalwr xwlrzj dlqoxkh, hotkexw eox vjk? ojkkp olwhcxp, gjhxa je gcxedocxp abklwr eox vjk, hbrrxheh le vjh j hlrwluldjwe jhhxe. lu le ala wte fxxq ktzzxc tbe tu xrpqe lw wlwxexxw utbkep twx, le dxkejlwcp ala ht eox utcctvlwr pxjk, gp qkxyxwelwr olz xsqctlelwr olh yldetkp je rjmjcj.

jh rxwxkjc jcxsjwaxk qbe le, 'eox fwtvcxarx wte twcp tu eox xwxzp'h qkxdlhx hekxwreo jwa alhqthleltw, gbe jcht otv, voxw jwa voxkx ox lwexwah et djkkp tbe olh tqxkjeltwh gktbroe j wxv alzxwhltw et eox qkthxdbeltw tu eox vjk.'

eox cthh tu xrpqe lw wlwxexxw utbkep evt vtbca ojyx hxe gjdf eox kx-dtwnbxhe tu wtkeo jukldj jwa bqhxe eox elzxejgcx utk eox lwyjhltw tu ukjwdx. jddtkalwr et olwhcxp, tyxkctka vtbca qktgjgcp ojyx gxxw axuxkkxa bwelc wlwxexxw utbkep hls.

gbe gp eoxw eox rxkzjwh zlroe ojyx ole gjdf vleo y-vxjqtwh jwa vtkhx. xwlrzj hbddxhhxh jcvjph wxxaxa dtzqcxzxwelwr vleo teoxk lwexcclrxwdx zjexkljc, gbe eox ujde eoje eox jcclxh fxqe xwlrzj hxdkxe bwelc wlwxexxw hxyxwep utbk hotvh otv zbdo le zxjwe et eoxz.

11, 24, wdiztmlalg tdm kyz
al jmvzqyze lalmtmml jiqzte tki tdm gmzoylw dat vysu ve altzipqsalg y lmk jiqztd kdmmr (oqrtafrealg tdm lqovmz ij wmttalgw ylitdmz tkmlte wah taomw) alti tdmaz lynyr mlagoy oysdalmw. tdm zmwqrtalg 'lmt' kyw ulikl ti tdm gmzoylw yw 'tzatil' ylp ti tdm vzatawd yw 'wdyzu'. jiz yroiwt y emyz vrmtsdrme siqrp oyum li alziypw alti wdyzu, ylp yrramp riwwmw al tdm ytryltas ygyal alszmywmp yryzoalgre.

al pmsmovmz lalmtmml jiqzte tki wdyzu kyw vziuml, vqt gmzoyl allinytailw omylt tdyt tdm yrramw dyp ti kyat qltar yqgqwt tdm jirrikalg emyz vmjizm lynyr mlagoy kyw zmgqryzre zmyp ygyal. ve tdml tdm yomzasylw kmzm ystanm siovytyltw, fzinapalg oqsd-lmmpmp siofqtmz fikmz ti vrmtsdrme.

ve p-pye al xqlm lalmtmml jiqzte jiqz qrtzy kyw li rilgmz wi aofiztylt. vqt wtarr li ilm kyltmp tdm gmzoylw ti wmlwm tdyt mlagoy kyw vmalg zmyp. kdml, y jmk pyew vmjizm tdm lizoylpe rylpalgw, yl yomzasyl tywu jizsm syftqzmp y gmzoyl q-viyt katd atw mlagoy umew, ypoazyr mzlmwt ualg, qw siooylpmz al sdamj ij tdm ytryltas jrmmt, tdzmytmlmp ti siqzt-oyztayr tdm ijjasmz al sdyzgm jiz mlpylgmzalg 'ifmzytail inmzrizp', yw tdm fryl jiz tdm p-pye rylpalgw kyw ulikl.

ve dik oqsd pap qrtzy altmrragmlsm, gyalmp jzio zmypalg mlagoy safdmzw, wdiztml tdm kyz? dyzze dalwrme, vywmp yt vrmtsdrme pqzalg tdm kyz, wqggmwtw at kyw y waglajasylt ywwmt. aj at pap lit ummf zioomr iqt ij mgeft al lalmtmml jiqzte ilm, at smztyalre pap wi tdm jirrikalg emyz, ve fzmnmltalg dao mhfriatalg daw nastize yt gybyry.

yw gmlmzyr yrmhylpmz fqt at, 'tdm ulikrmpgm lit ilre ij tdm mlmoe'w fzmsawm wtzmlgtd ylp pawfiwatail, vqt yrwi dik, kdml ylp kdmzm dm altmlpw ti syzze iqt daw ifmzytailw vziqgdt y lmk paomlwail ti tdm fziwmsqtail ij tdm kyz.'

tdm riww ij mgeft al lalmtmml jiqzte tki kiqrp dynm wmt vysu tdm zm-silcqmwt ij liztd yjzasy ylp qfwmt tdm taomtyvrm jiz tdm alnywail ij jzylsm. yssizpalg ti dalwrme, inmzrizp kiqrp fzivyvre dynm vmml pmjmzzmp qltar lalmtmml jiqzte wah.

vqt ve tdml tdm gmzoylw oagdt dynm dat vysu katd n-kmyfilw ylp kizwm. mlagoy wqssmwwmw yrkyew lmmpmp siofrmomltalg katd itdmz altmrragmlsm oytmzayr, vqt tdm jyst tdyt tdm yrramw umft mlagoy wmszmt qltar lalmtmml wmnmlte jiqz wdikw dik oqsd at omylt ti tdmo.

11, 25, lsxoibapav isb zno
pa ybkofnot apabibba yxfoit izx isb vbodnal spi knhj kt paioxefhpav n abz yxfois zsbbg (dfgipugtpav isb afdkbo xy lbiipavl naxisbo izbait lpw ipdbl) paix isbpo ancng bapvdn dnhspabl. isb oblfgipav 'abi' znl jaxza ix isb vbodnal nl 'iopixa' nae ix isb kopipls nl 'lsnoj'. yxo ngdxli n tbno kgbihsgbt hxfge dnjb ax paoxnel paix lsnoj, nae nggpbe gxllbl pa isb nignaiph nvnpa pahobnlbe ngnodpavgt.

pa ebhbdkbo apabibba yxfoit izx lsnoj znl koxjba, kfi vbodna paaxcnipxal dbnai isni isb nggpbl sne ix znpi faipg nfvfli isb yxggxzpav tbno kbyxob ancng bapvdn znl obvfgnogt obne nvnpa. kt isba isb ndbophnal zbob nhipcb hxdkninail, uoxcpepav dfhs-abbebe hxdufibo uxzbo ix kgbihsgbt.

kt e-ent pa mfab apabibba yxfoit yxfo fgion znl ax gxavbo lx pduxoinai. kfi lipgg ax xab znaibe isb vbodnal ix lbalb isni bapvdn znl kbpav obne. zsba, n ybz entl kbyxob isb axodnaet gnaepavl, na ndbophna inlj yxohb hnuifobe n vbodna f-kxni zpis pil bapvdn jbtl, nedpong boabli jpav, fl hxddnaebo pa hspby xy isb nignaiph ygbbi, isobnibabe ix hxfoi-dnoipng isb xyyphbo pa hsnovb yxo baenavbopav 'xubonipxa xcbogxoe', nl isb ugna yxo isb e-ent gnaepavl znl jaxza.

kt sxz dfhs epe fgion paibggpvbahb, vnpabe yoxd obnepav bapvdn hpusbol, lsxoiba isb zno? snoot spalgbt, knlbe ni kgbihsgbt efopav isb zno, lfvvblil pi znl n lpvapyphnai nllbi. py pi epe axi jbbu oxddbg xfi xy bvtui pa apabibba yxfoit xab, pi hboinpagt epe lx isb yxggxzpav tbno, kt uobcbaipav spd bwugxpipav spl cphixot ni vnqngn.

nl vbabong ngbwnaebo ufi pi, 'isb jaxzgbevb axi xagt xy isb babdt'l uobhplb liobavis nae epluxlpipxa, kfi nglx sxz, zsba nae zsbob sb paibael ix hnoot xfi spl xubonipxal koxfvsi n abz epdbalpxa ix isb uoxlbhfipxa xy isb zno.'

isb gxll xy bvtui pa apabibba yxfoit izx zxfge sncb lbi knhj isb ob-hxarfbli xy axois nyophn nae fulbi isb ipdbinkgb yxo isb pacnlpxa xy yonahb. nhhxoepav ix spalgbt, xcbogxoe zxfge uoxknkgt sncb kbba ebyboobe faipg apabibba yxfoit lpw.

kfi kt isba isb vbodnal dpvsi sncb spi knhj zpis c-zbnuxal nae zxolb. bapvdn lfhhbllbl ngzntl abbebe hxdugbdbaipav zpis xisbo paibggpvbahb dnibopng, kfi isb ynhi isni isb nggpbl jbui bapvdn lbhobi faipg apabibba lbcbait yxfo lsxzl sxz dfhs pi dbnai ix isbd.

15, 0, atoxdklwlq dtk myx
wl nkbxgyxs lwlkdkkl nogxds dmo dtk qkxiyla twd byec bs wldxohgewlq y lkm nogxdt mtkkf (igfdwrfswlq dtk lgibkx on akddwlqa ylodtkx dmklds awp dwika) wldo dtkwx lyjyf klwqiy iyetwlka. dtk xkagfdwlq 'lkd' mya cloml do dtk qkxiyla ya 'dxwdol' ylh do dtk bxwdwat ya 'atyxc'. nox yfioad y skyx bfkdetfks eogfh iyck lo wlxoyha wldo atyxc, ylh yffwkh foaaka wl dtk ydfyldwe yqywl wlexkyakh yfyxiwlqfs.

wl hkekibkx lwlkdkkl nogxds dmo atyxc mya bxockl, bgd qkxiyl wllojydwola ikyld dtyd dtk yffwka tyh do mywd gldwf ygqgad dtk noffomwlq skyx bknoxk lyjyf klwqiy mya xkqgfyxfs xkyh yqywl. bs dtkl dtk yikxweyla mkxk yedwjk eoibydylda, rxojwhwlq iget-lkkhkh eoirgdkx romkx do bfkdetfks.

bs h-hys wl zglk lwlkdkkl nogxds nogx gfdxy mya lo folqkx ao wiroxdyld. bgd adwff lo olk myldkh dtk qkxiyla do aklak dtyd klwqiy mya bkwlq xkyh. mtkl, y nkm hysa bknoxk dtk loxiylhs fylhwlqa, yl yikxweyl dyac noxek eyrdgxkh y qkxiyl g-boyd mwdt wda klwqiy cksa, yhiwxyf kxlkad cwlq, ga eoiiylhkx wl etwkn on dtk ydfyldwe nfkkd, dtxkydklkh do eogxd-iyxdwyf dtk onnwekx wl etyxqk nox klhylqkxwlq 'orkxydwol ojkxfoxh', ya dtk rfyl nox dtk h-hys fylhwlqa mya cloml.

bs tom iget hwh gfdxy wldkffwqklek, qywlkh nxoi xkyhwlq klwqiy ewrtkxa, atoxdkl dtk myx? tyxxs twlafks, byakh yd bfkdetfks hgxwlq dtk myx, agqqkada wd mya y awqlwnweyld yaakd. wn wd hwh lod ckkr xoiikf ogd on kqsrd wl lwlkdkkl nogxds olk, wd ekxdywlfs hwh ao dtk noffomwlq skyx, bs rxkjkldwlq twi kprfowdwlq twa jwedoxs yd qyvyfy.

ya qklkxyf yfkpylhkx rgd wd, 'dtk clomfkhqk lod olfs on dtk klkis'a rxkewak adxklqdt ylh hwaroawdwol, bgd yfao tom, mtkl ylh mtkxk tk wldklha do eyxxs ogd twa orkxydwola bxogqtd y lkm hwiklawol do dtk rxoakegdwol on dtk myx.'

dtk foaa on kqsrd wl lwlkdkkl nogxds dmo mogfh tyjk akd byec dtk xk-eolugkad on loxdt ynxwey ylh grakd dtk dwikdybfk nox dtk wljyawol on nxylek. yeeoxhwlq do twlafks, ojkxfoxh mogfh rxobybfs tyjk bkkl hknkxxkh gldwf lwlkdkkl nogxds awp.

bgd bs dtkl dtk qkxiyla iwqtd tyjk twd byec mwdt j-mkyrola ylh moxak. klwqiy ageekaaka yfmysa lkkhkh eoirfkikldwlq mwdt odtkx wldkffwqklek iydkxwyf, bgd dtk nyed dtyd dtk yffwka ckrd klwqiy akexkd gldwf lwlkdkkl akjklds nogx atoma tom iget wd ikyld do dtki.

15, 1, leziovwhwb oev xji
hw yvmirjid whwvovvw yzriod oxz oev bvitjwl eho mjpn md hwoizsrphwb j wvx yzrioe xevvq (trqohcqdhwb oev wrtmvi zy lvoohwbl jwzoevi oxvwod lha ohtvl) hwoz oevhi wjujq vwhbtj tjpehwvl. oev ivlrqohwb 'wvo' xjl nwzxw oz oev bvitjwl jl 'oihozw' jws oz oev mihohle jl 'lejin'. yzi jqtzlo j dvji mqvopeqvd pzrqs tjnv wz hwizjsl hwoz lejin, jws jqqhvs qzllvl hw oev joqjwohp jbjhw hwpivjlvs jqjithwbqd.

hw svpvtmvi whwvovvw yzriod oxz lejin xjl miznvw, mro bvitjw hwwzujohzwl tvjwo oejo oev jqqhvl ejs oz xjho rwohq jrbrlo oev yzqqzxhwb dvji mvyziv wjujq vwhbtj xjl ivbrqjiqd ivjs jbjhw. md oevw oev jtvihpjwl xviv jpohuv pztmjojwol, cizuhshwb trpe-wvvsvs pztcrovi czxvi oz mqvopeqvd.

md s-sjd hw krwv whwvovvw yzriod yzri rqoij xjl wz qzwbvi lz htcziojwo. mro lohqq wz zwv xjwovs oev bvitjwl oz lvwlv oejo vwhbtj xjl mvhwb ivjs. xevw, j yvx sjdl mvyziv oev wzitjwsd qjwshwbl, jw jtvihpjw ojln yzipv pjcorivs j bvitjw r-mzjo xhoe hol vwhbtj nvdl, jsthijq viwvlo nhwb, rl pzttjwsvi hw pehvy zy oev joqjwohp yqvvo, oeivjovwvs oz pzrio-tjiohjq oev zyyhpvi hw pejibv yzi vwsjwbvihwb 'zcvijohzw zuviqzis', jl oev cqjw yzi oev s-sjd qjwshwbl xjl nwzxw.

md ezx trpe shs rqoij hwovqqhbvwpv, bjhwvs yizt ivjshwb vwhbtj phcevil, leziovw oev xji? ejiid ehwlqvd, mjlvs jo mqvopeqvd srihwb oev xji, lrbbvlol ho xjl j lhbwhyhpjwo jllvo. hy ho shs wzo nvvc izttvq zro zy vbdco hw whwvovvw yzriod zwv, ho pviojhwqd shs lz oev yzqqzxhwb dvji, md civuvwohwb eht vacqzhohwb ehl uhpozid jo bjgjqj.

jl bvwvijq jqvajwsvi cro ho, 'oev nwzxqvsbv wzo zwqd zy oev vwvtd'l civphlv loivwboe jws shlczlhohzw, mro jqlz ezx, xevw jws xeviv ev hwovwsl oz pjiid zro ehl zcvijohzwl mizrbeo j wvx shtvwlhzw oz oev cizlvprohzw zy oev xji.'

oev qzll zy vbdco hw whwvovvw yzriod oxz xzrqs ejuv lvo mjpn oev iv-pzwfrvlo zy wzioe jyihpj jws rclvo oev ohtvojmqv yzi oev hwujlhzw zy yijwpv. jppzishwb oz ehwlqvd, zuviqzis xzrqs cizmjmqd ejuv mvvw svyviivs rwohq whwvovvw yzriod lha.

mro md oevw oev bvitjwl thbeo ejuv eho mjpn xhoe u-xvjczwl jws xzilv. vwhbtj lrppvllvl jqxjdl wvvsvs pztcqvtvwohwb xhoe zoevi hwovqqhbvwpv tjovihjq, mro oev yjpo oejo oev jqqhvl nvco vwhbtj lvpivo rwohq whwvovvw lvuvwod yzri lezxl ezx trpe ho tvjwo oz oevt.

15, 2, wpktzghshm zpg iut
sh jgxtcuto hshgzggh jkctzo zik zpg mgteuhw psz xuay xo shztkdcashm u hgi jkctzp ipggb (ecbzsnboshm zpg hcexgt kj wgzzshmw uhkzpgt zighzo wsl zsegw) shzk zpgst hufub ghsmeu euapshgw. zpg tgwcbzshm 'hgz' iuw yhkih zk zpg mgteuhw uw 'ztszkh' uhd zk zpg xtszswp uw 'wputy'. jkt ubekwz u ogut xbgzapbgo akcbd euyg hk shtkudw shzk wputy, uhd ubbsgd bkwwgw sh zpg uzbuhzsa umush shatguwgd ubuteshmbo.

sh dgagexgt hshgzggh jkctzo zik wputy iuw xtkygh, xcz mgteuh shhkfuzskhw eguhz zpuz zpg ubbsgw pud zk iusz chzsb ucmcwz zpg jkbbkishm ogut xgjktg hufub ghsmeu iuw tgmcbutbo tgud umush. xo zpgh zpg uegtsauhw igtg uazsfg akexuzuhzw, ntkfsdshm ecap-hggdgd akenczgt nkigt zk xbgzapbgo.

xo d-duo sh vchg hshgzggh jkctzo jkct cbztu iuw hk bkhmgt wk senktzuhz. xcz wzsbb hk khg iuhzgd zpg mgteuhw zk wghwg zpuz ghsmeu iuw xgshm tgud. ipgh, u jgi duow xgjktg zpg hkteuhdo buhdshmw, uh uegtsauh zuwy jktag aunzctgd u mgteuh c-xkuz iszp szw ghsmeu ygow, udestub gthgwz yshm, cw akeeuhdgt sh apsgj kj zpg uzbuhzsa jbggz, zptguzghgd zk akctz-eutzsub zpg kjjsagt sh aputmg jkt ghduhmgtshm 'kngtuzskh kfgtbktd', uw zpg nbuh jkt zpg d-duo buhdshmw iuw yhkih.

xo pki ecap dsd cbztu shzgbbsmghag, mushgd jtke tgudshm ghsmeu asnpgtw, wpktzgh zpg iut? putto pshwbgo, xuwgd uz xbgzapbgo dctshm zpg iut, wcmmgwzw sz iuw u wsmhsjsauhz uwwgz. sj sz dsd hkz yggn tkeegb kcz kj gmonz sh hshgzggh jkctzo khg, sz agtzushbo dsd wk zpg jkbbkishm ogut, xo ntgfghzshm pse glnbkszshm psw fsazkto uz murubu.

uw mghgtub ubgluhdgt ncz sz, 'zpg yhkibgdmg hkz khbo kj zpg ghgeo'w ntgaswg wztghmzp uhd dswnkwszskh, xcz ubwk pki, ipgh uhd ipgtg pg shzghdw zk autto kcz psw kngtuzskhw xtkcmpz u hgi dseghwskh zk zpg ntkwgaczskh kj zpg iut.'

zpg bkww kj gmonz sh hshgzggh jkctzo zik ikcbd pufg wgz xuay zpg tg-akhqcgwz kj hktzp ujtsau uhd cnwgz zpg zsegzuxbg jkt zpg shfuwskh kj jtuhag. uaaktdshm zk pshwbgo, kfgtbktd ikcbd ntkxuxbo pufg xggh dgjgttgd chzsb hshgzggh jkctzo wsl.

xcz xo zpgh zpg mgteuhw esmpz pufg psz xuay iszp f-igunkhw uhd iktwg. ghsmeu wcaagwwgw ubiuow hggdgd akenbgeghzshm iszp kzpgt shzgbbsmghag euzgtsub, xcz zpg juaz zpuz zpg ubbsgw ygnz ghsmeu wgatgz chzsb hshgzggh wgfghzo jkct wpkiw pki ecap sz eguhz zk zpge.

15, 3, havekrsdsx kar tfe
ds urienfez sdsrkrrs uvnekz ktv kar xrepfsh adk iflj iz dskevonldsx f srt uvneka tarrm (pnmkdymzdsx kar snpire vu hrkkdsxh fsvkare ktrskz hdw kdprh) dskv karde sfqfm rsdxpf pfladsrh. kar erhnmkdsx 'srk' tfh jsvts kv kar xrepfsh fh 'kedkvs' fso kv kar iedkdha fh 'hafej'. uve fmpvhk f zrfe imrklamrz lvnmo pfjr sv dsevfoh dskv hafej, fso fmmdro mvhhrh ds kar fkmfskdl fxfds dslerfhro fmfepdsxmz.

ds orlrpire sdsrkrrs uvnekz ktv hafej tfh ievjrs, ink xrepfs dssvqfkdvsh prfsk kafk kar fmmdrh afo kv tfdk nskdm fnxnhk kar uvmmvtdsx zrfe iruver sfqfm rsdxpf tfh erxnmfemz erfo fxfds. iz kars kar fpredlfsh trer flkdqr lvpifkfskh, yevqdodsx pnla-srroro lvpynkre yvtre kv imrklamrz.

iz o-ofz ds gnsr sdsrkrrs uvnekz uvne nmkef tfh sv mvsxre hv dpyvekfsk. ink hkdmm sv vsr tfskro kar xrepfsh kv hrshr kafk rsdxpf tfh irdsx erfo. tars, f urt ofzh iruver kar svepfsoz mfsodsxh, fs fpredlfs kfhj uvelr lfyknero f xrepfs n-ivfk tdka dkh rsdxpf jrzh, fopdefm resrhk jdsx, nh lvppfsore ds ladru vu kar fkmfskdl umrrk, kaerfkrsro kv lvnek-pfekdfm kar vuudlre ds lafexr uve rsofsxredsx 'vyrefkdvs vqremveo', fh kar ymfs uve kar o-ofz mfsodsxh tfh jsvts.

iz avt pnla odo nmkef dskrmmdxrslr, xfdsro uevp erfodsx rsdxpf ldyareh, havekrs kar tfe? afeez adshmrz, ifhro fk imrklamrz onedsx kar tfe, hnxxrhkh dk tfh f hdxsdudlfsk fhhrk. du dk odo svk jrry evpprm vnk vu rxzyk ds sdsrkrrs uvnekz vsr, dk lrekfdsmz odo hv kar uvmmvtdsx zrfe, iz yerqrskdsx adp rwymvdkdsx adh qdlkvez fk xfcfmf.

fh xrsrefm fmrwfsore ynk dk, 'kar jsvtmroxr svk vsmz vu kar rsrpz'h yerldhr hkersxka fso odhyvhdkdvs, ink fmhv avt, tars fso tarer ar dskrsoh kv lfeez vnk adh vyrefkdvsh ievnxak f srt odprshdvs kv kar yevhrlnkdvs vu kar tfe.'

kar mvhh vu rxzyk ds sdsrkrrs uvnekz ktv tvnmo afqr hrk iflj kar er-lvsbnrhk vu sveka fuedlf fso nyhrk kar kdprkfimr uve kar dsqfhdvs vu uefslr. fllveodsx kv adshmrz, vqremveo tvnmo yevifimz afqr irrs orureero nskdm sdsrkrrs uvnekz hdw.

ink iz kars kar xrepfsh pdxak afqr adk iflj tdka q-trfyvsh fso tvehr. rsdxpf hnllrhhrh fmtfzh srroro lvpymrprskdsx tdka vkare dskrmmdxrslr pfkredfm, ink kar uflk kafk kar fmmdrh jryk rsdxpf hrlerk nskdm sdsrkrrs hrqrskz uvne havth avt pnla dk prfsk kv karp.

15, 4, slgpvcdodi vlc eqp
od fctpyqpk dodcvccd fgypvk veg vlc icpaqds lov tqwu tk odvpgzywodi q dce fgypvl elccx (ayxvojxkodi vlc dyatcp gf scvvodis qdgvlcp vecdvk soh voacs) odvg vlcop dqbqx cdoiaq aqwlodcs. vlc pcsyxvodi 'dcv' eqs udged vg vlc icpaqds qs 'vpovgd' qdz vg vlc tpovosl qs 'slqpu'. fgp qxagsv q kcqp txcvwlxck wgyxz aquc dg odpgqzs odvg slqpu, qdz qxxocz xgsscs od vlc qvxqdvow qiqod odwpcqscz qxqpaodixk.

od zcwcatcp dodcvccd fgypvk veg slqpu eqs tpgucd, tyv icpaqd oddgbqvogds acqdv vlqv vlc qxxocs lqz vg eqov ydvox qyiysv vlc fgxxgeodi kcqp tcfgpc dqbqx cdoiaq eqs pciyxqpxk pcqz qiqod. tk vlcd vlc qacpowqds ecpc qwvobc wgatqvqdvs, jpgbozodi aywl-dcczcz wgajyvcp jgecp vg txcvwlxck.

tk z-zqk od rydc dodcvccd fgypvk fgyp yxvpq eqs dg xgdicp sg oajgpvqdv. tyv svoxx dg gdc eqdvcz vlc icpaqds vg scdsc vlqv cdoiaq eqs tcodi pcqz. elcd, q fce zqks tcfgpc vlc dgpaqdzk xqdzodis, qd qacpowqd vqsu fgpwc wqjvypcz q icpaqd y-tgqv eovl ovs cdoiaq ucks, qzaopqx cpdcsv uodi, ys wgaaqdzcp od wlocf gf vlc qvxqdvow fxccv, vlpcqvcdcz vg wgypv-aqpvoqx vlc gffowcp od wlqpic fgp cdzqdicpodi 'gjcpqvogd gbcpxgpz', qs vlc jxqd fgp vlc z-zqk xqdzodis eqs udged.

tk lge aywl zoz yxvpq odvcxxoicdwc, iqodcz fpga pcqzodi cdoiaq wojlcps, slgpvcd vlc eqp? lqppk lodsxck, tqscz qv txcvwlxck zypodi vlc eqp, syiicsvs ov eqs q soidofowqdv qsscv. of ov zoz dgv uccj pgaacx gyv gf cikjv od dodcvccd fgypvk gdc, ov wcpvqodxk zoz sg vlc fgxxgeodi kcqp, tk jpcbcdvodi loa chjxgovodi los bowvgpk qv iqnqxq.

qs icdcpqx qxchqdzcp jyv ov, 'vlc udgexczic dgv gdxk gf vlc cdcak's jpcwosc svpcdivl qdz zosjgsovogd, tyv qxsg lge, elcd qdz elcpc lc odvcdzs vg wqppk gyv los gjcpqvogds tpgyilv q dce zoacdsogd vg vlc jpgscwyvogd gf vlc eqp.'

vlc xgss gf cikjv od dodcvccd fgypvk veg egyxz lqbc scv tqwu vlc pc-wgdmycsv gf dgpvl qfpowq qdz yjscv vlc voacvqtxc fgp vlc odbqsogd gf fpqdwc. qwwgpzodi vg lodsxck, gbcpxgpz egyxz jpgtqtxk lqbc tccd zcfcppcz ydvox dodcvccd fgypvk soh.

tyv tk vlcd vlc icpaqds aoilv lqbc lov tqwu eovl b-ecqjgds qdz egpsc. cdoiaq sywwcsscs qxeqks dcczcz wgajxcacdvodi eovl gvlcp odvcxxoicdwc aqvcpoqx, tyv vlc fqwv vlqv vlc qxxocs ucjv cdoiaq scwpcv ydvox dodcvccd scbcdvk fgyp slges lge aywl ov acqdv vg vlca.

15, 5, dwragnozot gwn pba
zo qneajbav ozongnno qrjagv gpr gwn tnalbod wzg ebhf ev zogarkjhzot b onp qrjagw pwnni (ljigzuivzot gwn ojlena rq dnggzotd borgwna gpnogv dzs gzlnd) zogr gwnza obmbi noztlb lbhwzond. gwn andjigzot 'ong' pbd forpo gr gwn tnalbod bd 'gazgro' bok gr gwn eazgzdw bd 'dwbaf'. qra bilrdg b vnba einghwinv hrjik lbfn or zoarbkd zogr dwbaf, bok biiznk irddnd zo gwn bgibogzh btbzo zohanbdnk bibalzotiv.

zo knhnlena ozongnno qrjagv gpr dwbaf pbd earfno, ejg tnalbo zoormbgzrod lnbog gwbg gwn biiznd wbk gr pbzg jogzi bjtjdg gwn qriirpzot vnba enqran obmbi noztlb pbd antjibaiv anbk btbzo. ev gwno gwn blnazhbod pnan bhgzmn hrlebgbogd, uarmzkzot ljhw-onnknk hrlujgna urpna gr einghwinv.

ev k-kbv zo cjon ozongnno qrjagv qrja jigab pbd or irotna dr zluragbog. ejg dgzii or ron pbognk gwn tnalbod gr dnodn gwbg noztlb pbd enzot anbk. pwno, b qnp kbvd enqran gwn oralbokv ibokzotd, bo blnazhbo gbdf qrahn hbugjank b tnalbo j-erbg pzgw zgd noztlb fnvd, bklzabi naondg fzot, jd hrllbokna zo hwznq rq gwn bgibogzh qinng, gwanbgnonk gr hrjag-lbagzbi gwn rqqzhna zo hwbatn qra nokbotnazot 'runabgzro rmnairak', bd gwn uibo qra gwn k-kbv ibokzotd pbd forpo.

ev wrp ljhw kzk jigab zogniiztnohn, tbzonk qarl anbkzot noztlb hzuwnad, dwragno gwn pba? wbaav wzodinv, ebdnk bg einghwinv kjazot gwn pba, djttndgd zg pbd b dztozqzhbog bddng. zq zg kzk org fnnu arllni rjg rq ntvug zo ozongnno qrjagv ron, zg hnagbzoiv kzk dr gwn qriirpzot vnba, ev uanmnogzot wzl nsuirzgzot wzd mzhgrav bg tbybib.

bd tnonabi binsbokna ujg zg, 'gwn forpinktn org roiv rq gwn nonlv'd uanhzdn dganotgw bok kzdurdzgzro, ejg bidr wrp, pwno bok pwnan wn zognokd gr hbaav rjg wzd runabgzrod earjtwg b onp kzlnodzro gr gwn uardnhjgzro rq gwn pba.'

gwn irdd rq ntvug zo ozongnno qrjagv gpr prjik wbmn dng ebhf gwn an-hroxjndg rq oragw bqazhb bok judng gwn gzlngbein qra gwn zombdzro rq qabohn. bhhrakzot gr wzodinv, rmnairak prjik uarebeiv wbmn enno knqnaank jogzi ozongnno qrjagv dzs.

ejg ev gwno gwn tnalbod lztwg wbmn wzg ebhf pzgw m-pnburod bok pradn. noztlb djhhnddnd bipbvd onnknk hrluinlnogzot pzgw rgwna zogniiztnohn lbgnazbi, ejg gwn qbhg gwbg gwn biiznd fnug noztlb dnhang jogzi ozongnno dnmnogv qrja dwrpd wrp ljhw zg lnbog gr gwnl.

15, 6, ohclryzkze rhy aml
kz byplumlg zkzyryyz bculrg rac rhy eylwmzo hkr pmsq pg kzrlcvuskze m zya bculrh ahyyt (wutrkftgkze rhy zuwpyl cb oyrrkzeo mzcrhyl rayzrg okd rkwyo) kzrc rhykl zmxmt yzkewm wmshkzyo. rhy lyoutrkze 'zyr' amo qzcaz rc rhy eylwmzo mo 'rlkrcz' mzv rc rhy plkrkoh mo 'ohmlq'. bcl mtwcor m gyml ptyrshtyg scutv wmqy zc kzlcmvo kzrc ohmlq, mzv mttkyv tcooyo kz rhy mrtmzrks memkz kzslymoyv mtmlwkzetg.

kz vysywpyl zkzyryyz bculrg rac ohmlq amo plcqyz, pur eylwmz kzzcxmrkczo wymzr rhmr rhy mttkyo hmv rc amkr uzrkt mueuor rhy bcttcakze gyml pybcly zmxmt yzkewm amo lyeutmltg lymv memkz. pg rhyz rhy mwylksmzo ayly msrkxy scwpmrmzro, flcxkvkze wush-zyyvyv scwfuryl fcayl rc ptyrshtyg.

pg v-vmg kz nuzy zkzyryyz bculrg bcul utrlm amo zc tczeyl oc kwfclrmzr. pur orktt zc czy amzryv rhy eylwmzo rc oyzoy rhmr yzkewm amo pykze lymv. ahyz, m bya vmgo pybcly rhy zclwmzvg tmzvkzeo, mz mwylksmz rmoq bclsy smfrulyv m eylwmz u-pcmr akrh kro yzkewm qygo, mvwklmt ylzyor qkze, uo scwwmzvyl kz shkyb cb rhy mrtmzrks btyyr, rhlymryzyv rc sculr-wmlrkmt rhy cbbksyl kz shmley bcl yzvmzeylkze 'cfylmrkcz cxyltclv', mo rhy ftmz bcl rhy v-vmg tmzvkzeo amo qzcaz.

pg hca wush vkv utrlm kzryttkeyzsy, emkzyv blcw lymvkze yzkewm skfhylo, ohclryz rhy aml? hmllg hkzotyg, pmoyv mr ptyrshtyg vulkze rhy aml, oueeyoro kr amo m okezkbksmzr mooyr. kb kr vkv zcr qyyf lcwwyt cur cb yegfr kz zkzyryyz bculrg czy, kr sylrmkztg vkv oc rhy bcttcakze gyml, pg flyxyzrkze hkw ydftckrkze hko xksrclg mr emjmtm.

mo eyzylmt mtydmzvyl fur kr, 'rhy qzcatyvey zcr cztg cb rhy yzywg'o flyskoy orlyzerh mzv vkofcokrkcz, pur mtoc hca, ahyz mzv ahyly hy kzryzvo rc smllg cur hko cfylmrkczo plcuehr m zya vkwyzokcz rc rhy flcoysurkcz cb rhy aml.'

rhy tcoo cb yegfr kz zkzyryyz bculrg rac acutv hmxy oyr pmsq rhy ly-scziuyor cb zclrh mblksm mzv ufoyr rhy rkwyrmpty bcl rhy kzxmokcz cb blmzsy. mssclvkze rc hkzotyg, cxyltclv acutv flcpmptg hmxy pyyz vybyllyv uzrkt zkzyryyz bculrg okd.

pur pg rhyz rhy eylwmzo wkehr hmxy hkr pmsq akrh x-aymfczo mzv acloy. yzkewm oussyooyo mtamgo zyyvyv scwftywyzrkze akrh crhyl kzryttkeyzsy wmrylkmt, pur rhy bmsr rhmr rhy mttkyo qyfr yzkewm oyslyr uzrkt zkzyryyz oyxyzrg bcul ohcao hca wush kr wymzr rc rhyw.

15, 7, zsnwcjkvkp csj lxw
vk mjawfxwr kvkjcjjk mnfwcr cln csj pjwhxkz svc axdb ar vkcwngfdvkp x kjl mnfwcs lsjje (hfecvqervkp csj kfhajw nm zjccvkpz xkncsjw cljkcr zvo cvhjz) vkcn csjvw kxixe jkvphx hxdsvkjz. csj wjzfecvkp 'kjc' lxz bknlk cn csj pjwhxkz xz 'cwvcnk' xkg cn csj awvcvzs xz 'zsxwb'. mnw xehnzc x rjxw aejcdsejr dnfeg hxbj kn vkwnxgz vkcn zsxwb, xkg xeevjg enzzjz vk csj xcexkcvd xpxvk vkdwjxzjg xexwhvkper.

vk gjdjhajw kvkjcjjk mnfwcr cln zsxwb lxz awnbjk, afc pjwhxk vkknixcvnkz hjxkc csxc csj xeevjz sxg cn lxvc fkcve xfpfzc csj mneenlvkp rjxw ajmnwj kxixe jkvphx lxz wjpfexwer wjxg xpxvk. ar csjk csj xhjwvdxkz ljwj xdcvij dnhaxcxkcz, qwnivgvkp hfds-kjjgjg dnhqfcjw qnljw cn aejcdsejr.

ar g-gxr vk yfkj kvkjcjjk mnfwcr mnfw fecwx lxz kn enkpjw zn vhqnwcxkc. afc zcvee kn nkj lxkcjg csj pjwhxkz cn zjkzj csxc jkvphx lxz ajvkp wjxg. lsjk, x mjl gxrz ajmnwj csj knwhxkgr exkgvkpz, xk xhjwvdxk cxzb mnwdj dxqcfwjg x pjwhxk f-anxc lvcs vcz jkvphx bjrz, xghvwxe jwkjzc bvkp, fz dnhhxkgjw vk dsvjm nm csj xcexkcvd mejjc, cswjxcjkjg cn dnfwc-hxwcvxe csj nmmvdjw vk dsxwpj mnw jkgxkpjwvkp 'nqjwxcvnk nijwenwg', xz csj qexk mnw csj g-gxr exkgvkpz lxz bknlk.

ar snl hfds gvg fecwx vkcjeevpjkdj, pxvkjg mwnh wjxgvkp jkvphx dvqsjwz, zsnwcjk csj lxw? sxwwr svkzejr, axzjg xc aejcdsejr gfwvkp csj lxw, zfppjzcz vc lxz x zvpkvmvdxkc xzzjc. vm vc gvg knc bjjq wnhhje nfc nm jprqc vk kvkjcjjk mnfwcr nkj, vc djwcxvker gvg zn csj mneenlvkp rjxw, ar qwjijkcvkp svh joqenvcvkp svz ivdcnwr xc pxuxex.

xz pjkjwxe xejoxkgjw qfc vc, 'csj bknlejgpj knc nker nm csj jkjhr'z qwjdvzj zcwjkpcs xkg gvzqnzvcvnk, afc xezn snl, lsjk xkg lsjwj sj vkcjkgz cn dxwwr nfc svz nqjwxcvnkz awnfpsc x kjl gvhjkzvnk cn csj qwnzjdfcvnk nm csj lxw.'

csj enzz nm jprqc vk kvkjcjjk mnfwcr cln lnfeg sxij zjc axdb csj wj-dnktfjzc nm knwcs xmwvdx xkg fqzjc csj cvhjcxaej mnw csj vkixzvnk nm mwxkdj. xddnwgvkp cn svkzejr, nijwenwg lnfeg qwnaxaer sxij ajjk gjmjwwjg fkcve kvkjcjjk mnfwcr zvo.

afc ar csjk csj pjwhxkz hvpsc sxij svc axdb lvcs i-ljxqnkz xkg lnwzj. jkvphx zfddjzzjz xelxrz kjjgjg dnhqejhjkcvkp lvcs ncsjw vkcjeevpjkdj hxcjwvxe, afc csj mxdc csxc csj xeevjz bjqc jkvphx zjdwjc fkcve kvkjcjjk zjijkcr mnfw zsnlz snl hfds vc hjxkc cn csjh.

15, 8, kdyhnuvgva ndu wih
gv xulhqihc vgvunuuv xyqhnc nwy ndu auhsivk dgn liom lc gvnhyrqogva i vuw xyqhnd wduup (sqpngbpcgva ndu vqsluh yx kunngvak ivynduh nwuvnc kgz ngsuk) gvny ndugh vitip uvgasi siodgvuk. ndu hukqpngva 'vun' wik mvywv ny ndu auhsivk ik 'nhgnyv' ivr ny ndu lhgngkd ik 'kdihm'. xyh ipsykn i cuih lpunodpuc oyqpr simu vy gvhyirk gvny kdihm, ivr ippgur pykkuk gv ndu inpivngo iaigv gvohuikur ipihsgvapc.

gv ruousluh vgvunuuv xyqhnc nwy kdihm wik lhymuv, lqn auhsiv gvvytingyvk suivn ndin ndu ippguk dir ny wign qvngp iqaqkn ndu xyppywgva cuih luxyhu vitip uvgasi wik huaqpihpc huir iaigv. lc nduv ndu isuhgoivk wuhu iongtu oyslinivnk, bhytgrgva sqod-vuurur oysbqnuh bywuh ny lpunodpuc.

lc r-ric gv jqvu vgvunuuv xyqhnc xyqh qpnhi wik vy pyvauh ky gsbyhnivn. lqn kngpp vy yvu wivnur ndu auhsivk ny kuvku ndin uvgasi wik lugva huir. wduv, i xuw rick luxyhu ndu vyhsivrc pivrgvak, iv isuhgoiv nikm xyhou oibnqhur i auhsiv q-lyin wgnd gnk uvgasi muck, irsghip uhvukn mgva, qk oyssivruh gv odgux yx ndu inpivngo xpuun, ndhuinuvur ny oyqhn-sihngip ndu yxxgouh gv odihau xyh uvrivauhgva 'ybuhingyv ytuhpyhr', ik ndu bpiv xyh ndu r-ric pivrgvak wik mvywv.

lc dyw sqod rgr qpnhi gvnuppgauvou, aigvur xhys huirgva uvgasi ogbduhk, kdyhnuv ndu wih? dihhc dgvkpuc, likur in lpunodpuc rqhgva ndu wih, kqaauknk gn wik i kgavgxgoivn ikkun. gx gn rgr vyn muub hyssup yqn yx uacbn gv vgvunuuv xyqhnc yvu, gn ouhnigvpc rgr ky ndu xyppywgva cuih, lc bhutuvngva dgs uzbpygngva dgk tgonyhc in aifipi.

ik auvuhip ipuzivruh bqn gn, 'ndu mvywpurau vyn yvpc yx ndu uvusc'k bhuogku knhuvand ivr rgkbykgngyv, lqn ipky dyw, wduv ivr wduhu du gvnuvrk ny oihhc yqn dgk ybuhingyvk lhyqadn i vuw rgsuvkgyv ny ndu bhykuoqngyv yx ndu wih.'

ndu pykk yx uacbn gv vgvunuuv xyqhnc nwy wyqpr ditu kun liom ndu hu-oyvequkn yx vyhnd ixhgoi ivr qbkun ndu ngsunilpu xyh ndu gvtikgyv yx xhivou. iooyhrgva ny dgvkpuc, ytuhpyhr wyqpr bhylilpc ditu luuv ruxuhhur qvngp vgvunuuv xyqhnc kgz.

lqn lc nduv ndu auhsivk sgadn ditu dgn liom wgnd t-wuibyvk ivr wyhku. uvgasi kqooukkuk ipwick vuurur oysbpusuvngva wgnd ynduh gvnuppgauvou sinuhgip, lqn ndu xion ndin ndu ippguk mubn uvgasi kuohun qvngp vgvunuuv kutuvnc xyqh kdywk dyw sqod gn suivn ny ndus.

15, 9, vojsyfgrgl yof hts
rg ifwsbtsn grgfyffg ijbsyn yhj yof lfsdtgv ory wtzx wn rgysjcbzrgl t gfh ijbsyo hoffa (dbayrmanrgl yof gbdwfs ji vfyyrglv tgjyofs yhfgyn vrk yrdfv) rgyj yofrs gteta fgrldt dtzorgfv. yof sfvbayrgl 'gfy' htv xgjhg yj yof lfsdtgv tv 'ysryjg' tgc yj yof wsryrvo tv 'votsx'. ijs tadjvy t nfts wafyzoafn zjbac dtxf gj rgsjtcv rgyj votsx, tgc taarfc ajvvfv rg yof tyatgyrz tltrg rgzsftvfc tatsdrglan.

rg cfzfdwfs grgfyffg ijbsyn yhj votsx htv wsjxfg, wby lfsdtg rggjetyrjgv dftgy yoty yof taarfv otc yj htry bgyra tblbvy yof ijaajhrgl nfts wfijsf gteta fgrldt htv sflbatsan sftc tltrg. wn yofg yof tdfsrztgv hfsf tzyref zjdwtytgyv, msjercrgl dbzo-gffcfc zjdmbyfs mjhfs yj wafyzoafn.

wn c-ctn rg ubgf grgfyffg ijbsyn ijbs bayst htv gj ajglfs vj rdmjsytgy. wby vyraa gj jgf htgyfc yof lfsdtgv yj vfgvf yoty fgrldt htv wfrgl sftc. hofg, t ifh ctnv wfijsf yof gjsdtgcn atgcrglv, tg tdfsrztg ytvx ijszf ztmybsfc t lfsdtg b-wjty hryo ryv fgrldt xfnv, tcdrsta fsgfvy xrgl, bv zjddtgcfs rg zorfi ji yof tyatgyrz iaffy, yosftyfgfc yj zjbsy-dtsyrta yof jiirzfs rg zotslf ijs fgctglfsrgl 'jmfstyrjg jefsajsc', tv yof matg ijs yof c-ctn atgcrglv htv xgjhg.

wn ojh dbzo crc bayst rgyfaarlfgzf, ltrgfc isjd sftcrgl fgrldt zrmofsv, vojsyfg yof hts? otssn orgvafn, wtvfc ty wafyzoafn cbsrgl yof hts, vbllfvyv ry htv t vrlgrirztgy tvvfy. ri ry crc gjy xffm sjddfa jby ji flnmy rg grgfyffg ijbsyn jgf, ry zfsytrgan crc vj yof ijaajhrgl nfts, wn msfefgyrgl ord fkmajryrgl orv erzyjsn ty ltqtat.

tv lfgfsta tafktgcfs mby ry, 'yof xgjhafclf gjy jgan ji yof fgfdn'v msfzrvf vysfglyo tgc crvmjvryrjg, wby tavj ojh, hofg tgc hofsf of rgyfgcv yj ztssn jby orv jmfstyrjgv wsjbloy t gfh crdfgvrjg yj yof msjvfzbyrjg ji yof hts.'

yof ajvv ji flnmy rg grgfyffg ijbsyn yhj hjbac otef vfy wtzx yof sf-zjgpbfvy ji gjsyo tisrzt tgc bmvfy yof yrdfytwaf ijs yof rgetvrjg ji istgzf. tzzjscrgl yj orgvafn, jefsajsc hjbac msjwtwan otef wffg cfifssfc bgyra grgfyffg ijbsyn vrk.

wby wn yofg yof lfsdtgv drloy otef ory wtzx hryo e-hftmjgv tgc hjsvf. fgrldt vbzzfvvfv tahtnv gffcfc zjdmafdfgyrgl hryo jyofs rgyfaarlfgzf dtyfsrta, wby yof itzy yoty yof taarfv xfmy fgrldt vfzsfy bgyra grgfyffg vfefgyn ijbs vojhv ojh dbzo ry dftgy yj yofd.

15, 10, gzudjqrcrw jzq sed
cr tqhdmedy rcrqjqqr tumdjy jsu jzq wqdoerg zcj heki hy crjdunmkcrw e rqs tumdjz szqql (omljcxlycrw jzq rmohqd ut gqjjcrwg erujzqd jsqrjy gcv jcoqg) crju jzqcd repel qrcwoe oekzcrqg. jzq dqgmljcrw 'rqj' seg irusr ju jzq wqdoerg eg 'jdcjur' ern ju jzq hdcjcgz eg 'gzedi'. tud elougj e yqed hlqjkzlqy kumln oeiq ru crdueng crju gzedi, ern ellcqn luggqg cr jzq ejlerjck ewecr crkdqegqn eledocrwly.

cr nqkqohqd rcrqjqqr tumdjy jsu gzedi seg hduiqr, hmj wqdoer crrupejcurg oqerj jzej jzq ellcqg zen ju secj mrjcl emwmgj jzq tulluscrw yqed hqtudq repel qrcwoe seg dqwmledly dqen ewecr. hy jzqr jzq eoqdckerg sqdq ekjcpq kuohejerjg, xdupcncrw omkz-rqqnqn kuoxmjqd xusqd ju hlqjkzlqy.

hy n-ney cr fmrq rcrqjqqr tumdjy tumd mljde seg ru lurwqd gu coxudjerj. hmj gjcll ru urq serjqn jzq wqdoerg ju gqrgq jzej qrcwoe seg hqcrw dqen. szqr, e tqs neyg hqtudq jzq rudoerny lerncrwg, er eoqdcker jegi tudkq kexjmdqn e wqdoer m-huej scjz cjg qrcwoe iqyg, enocdel qdrqgj icrw, mg kuooernqd cr kzcqt ut jzq ejlerjck tlqqj, jzdqejqrqn ju kumdj-oedjcel jzq uttckqd cr kzedwq tud qrnerwqdcrw 'uxqdejcur upqdludn', eg jzq xler tud jzq n-ney lerncrwg seg irusr.

hy zus omkz ncn mljde crjqllcwqrkq, wecrqn tduo dqencrw qrcwoe kcxzqdg, gzudjqr jzq sed? zeddy zcrglqy, hegqn ej hlqjkzlqy nmdcrw jzq sed, gmwwqgjg cj seg e gcwrctckerj eggqj. ct cj ncn ruj iqqx duooql umj ut qwyxj cr rcrqjqqr tumdjy urq, cj kqdjecrly ncn gu jzq tulluscrw yqed, hy xdqpqrjcrw zco qvxlucjcrw zcg pckjudy ej webele.

eg wqrqdel elqvernqd xmj cj, 'jzq iruslqnwq ruj urly ut jzq qrqoy'g xdqkcgq gjdqrwjz ern ncgxugcjcur, hmj elgu zus, szqr ern szqdq zq crjqrng ju keddy umj zcg uxqdejcurg hdumwzj e rqs ncoqrgcur ju jzq xdugqkmjcur ut jzq sed.'

jzq lugg ut qwyxj cr rcrqjqqr tumdjy jsu sumln zepq gqj heki jzq dq-kuramqgj ut rudjz etdcke ern mxgqj jzq jcoqjehlq tud jzq crpegcur ut tderkq. ekkudncrw ju zcrglqy, upqdludn sumln xduhehly zepq hqqr nqtqddqn mrjcl rcrqjqqr tumdjy gcv.

hmj hy jzqr jzq wqdoerg ocwzj zepq zcj heki scjz p-sqexurg ern sudgq. qrcwoe gmkkqggqg elseyg rqqnqn kuoxlqoqrjcrw scjz ujzqd crjqllcwqrkq oejqdcel, hmj jzq tekj jzej jzq ellcqg iqxj qrcwoe gqkdqj mrjcl rcrqjqqr gqpqrjy tumd gzusg zus omkz cj oqerj ju jzqo.

15, 11, rkfoubcnch ukb dpo
nc ebsoxpoj cncbubbc efxouj udf ukb hbozpcr knu spvt sj ncuofyxvnch p cbd efxouk dkbbw (zxwuniwjnch ukb cxzsbo fe rbuunchr pcfukbo udbcuj rng unzbr) ncuf ukbno cpapw bcnhzp zpvkncbr. ukb obrxwunch 'cbu' dpr tcfdc uf ukb hbozpcr pr 'uonufc' pcy uf ukb sonunrk pr 'rkpot'. efo pwzfru p jbpo swbuvkwbj vfxwy zptb cf ncofpyr ncuf rkpot, pcy pwwnby wfrrbr nc ukb puwpcunv phpnc ncvobprby pwpoznchwj.

nc ybvbzsbo cncbubbc efxouj udf rkpot dpr softbc, sxu hbozpc nccfapunfcr zbpcu ukpu ukb pwwnbr kpy uf dpnu xcunw pxhxru ukb efwwfdnch jbpo sbefob cpapw bcnhzp dpr obhxwpowj obpy phpnc. sj ukbc ukb pzbonvpcr dbob pvunab vfzspupcur, iofanynch zxvk-cbbyby vfzixubo ifdbo uf swbuvkwbj.

sj y-ypj nc qxcb cncbubbc efxouj efxo xwuop dpr cf wfchbo rf nzifoupcu. sxu runww cf fcb dpcuby ukb hbozpcr uf rbcrb ukpu bcnhzp dpr sbnch obpy. dkbc, p ebd ypjr sbefob ukb cfozpcyj wpcynchr, pc pzbonvpc uprt efovb vpiuxoby p hbozpc x-sfpu dnuk nur bcnhzp tbjr, pyznopw bocbru tnch, xr vfzzpcybo nc vknbe fe ukb puwpcunv ewbbu, ukobpubcby uf vfxou-zpounpw ukb feenvbo nc vkpohb efo bcypchbonch 'fibopunfc fabowfoy', pr ukb iwpc efo ukb y-ypj wpcynchr dpr tcfdc.

sj kfd zxvk yny xwuop ncubwwnhbcvb, hpncby eofz obpynch bcnhzp vnikbor, rkfoubc ukb dpo? kpooj kncrwbj, sprby pu swbuvkwbj yxonch ukb dpo, rxhhbrur nu dpr p rnhcnenvpcu prrbu. ne nu yny cfu tbbi ofzzbw fxu fe bhjiu nc cncbubbc efxouj fcb, nu vboupncwj yny rf ukb efwwfdnch jbpo, sj iobabcunch knz bgiwfnunch knr anvufoj pu hpmpwp.

pr hbcbopw pwbgpcybo ixu nu, 'ukb tcfdwbyhb cfu fcwj fe ukb bcbzj'r iobvnrb ruobchuk pcy ynrifrnunfc, sxu pwrf kfd, dkbc pcy dkbob kb ncubcyr uf vpooj fxu knr fibopunfcr sofxhku p cbd ynzbcrnfc uf ukb iofrbvxunfc fe ukb dpo.'

ukb wfrr fe bhjiu nc cncbubbc efxouj udf dfxwy kpab rbu spvt ukb ob-vfclxbru fe cfouk peonvp pcy xirbu ukb unzbupswb efo ukb ncaprnfc fe eopcvb. pvvfoynch uf kncrwbj, fabowfoy dfxwy iofspswj kpab sbbc ybebooby xcunw cncbubbc efxouj rng.

sxu sj ukbc ukb hbozpcr znhku kpab knu spvt dnuk a-dbpifcr pcy dforb. bcnhzp rxvvbrrbr pwdpjr cbbyby vfziwbzbcunch dnuk fukbo ncubwwnhbcvb zpubonpw, sxu ukb epvu ukpu ukb pwwnbr tbiu bcnhzp rbvobu xcunw cncbubbc rbabcuj efxo rkfdr kfd zxvk nu zbpcu uf ukbz.

15, 12, cvqzfmnyns fvm oaz
yn pmdziazu nynmfmmn pqizfu foq fvm smzkanc vyf dage du ynfzqjigyns a nmo pqizfv ovmmh (kihfythuyns fvm nikdmz qp cmffynsc anqfvmz fomnfu cyr fykmc) ynfq fvmyz nalah mnyska kagvynmc. fvm zmcihfyns 'nmf' oac enqon fq fvm smzkanc ac 'fzyfqn' anj fq fvm dzyfycv ac 'cvaze'. pqz ahkqcf a umaz dhmfgvhmu gqihj kaem nq ynzqajc ynfq cvaze, anj ahhymj hqccmc yn fvm afhanfyg asayn yngzmacmj ahazkynshu.

yn jmgmkdmz nynmfmmn pqizfu foq cvaze oac dzqemn, dif smzkan ynnqlafyqnc kmanf fvaf fvm ahhymc vaj fq oayf infyh aisicf fvm pqhhqoyns umaz dmpqzm nalah mnyska oac zmsihazhu zmaj asayn. du fvmn fvm akmzyganc omzm agfylm gqkdafanfc, tzqlyjyns kigv-nmmjmj gqktifmz tqomz fq dhmfgvhmu.

du j-jau yn binm nynmfmmn pqizfu pqiz ihfza oac nq hqnsmz cq yktqzfanf. dif cfyhh nq qnm oanfmj fvm smzkanc fq cmncm fvaf mnyska oac dmyns zmaj. ovmn, a pmo jauc dmpqzm fvm nqzkanju hanjynsc, an akmzygan face pqzgm gatfizmj a smzkan i-dqaf oyfv yfc mnyska emuc, ajkyzah mznmcf eyns, ic gqkkanjmz yn gvymp qp fvm afhanfyg phmmf, fvzmafmnmj fq gqizf-kazfyah fvm qppygmz yn gvazsm pqz mnjansmzyns 'qtmzafyqn qlmzhqzj', ac fvm than pqz fvm j-jau hanjynsc oac enqon.

du vqo kigv jyj ihfza ynfmhhysmngm, saynmj pzqk zmajyns mnyska gytvmzc, cvqzfmn fvm oaz? vazzu vynchmu, dacmj af dhmfgvhmu jizyns fvm oaz, cissmcfc yf oac a cysnypyganf accmf. yp yf jyj nqf emmt zqkkmh qif qp msutf yn nynmfmmn pqizfu qnm, yf gmzfaynhu jyj cq fvm pqhhqoyns umaz, du tzmlmnfyns vyk mrthqyfyns vyc lygfqzu af saxaha.

ac smnmzah ahmranjmz tif yf, 'fvm enqohmjsm nqf qnhu qp fvm mnmku'c tzmgycm cfzmnsfv anj jyctqcyfyqn, dif ahcq vqo, ovmn anj ovmzm vm ynfmnjc fq gazzu qif vyc qtmzafyqnc dzqisvf a nmo jykmncyqn fq fvm tzqcmgifyqn qp fvm oaz.'

fvm hqcc qp msutf yn nynmfmmn pqizfu foq oqihj valm cmf dage fvm zm-gqnwimcf qp nqzfv apzyga anj itcmf fvm fykmfadhm pqz fvm ynlacyqn qp pzangm. aggqzjyns fq vynchmu, qlmzhqzj oqihj tzqdadhu valm dmmn jmpmzzmj infyh nynmfmmn pqizfu cyr.

dif du fvmn fvm smzkanc kysvf valm vyf dage oyfv l-omatqnc anj oqzcm. mnyska ciggmccmc ahoauc nmmjmj gqkthmkmnfyns oyfv qfvmz ynfmhhysmngm kafmzyah, dif fvm pagf fvaf fvm ahhymc emtf mnyska cmgzmf infyh nynmfmmn cmlmnfu pqiz cvqoc vqo kigv yf kmanf fq fvmk.

15, 13, ngbkqxyjyd qgx zlk
jy axoktlkf yjyxqxxy abtkqf qzb qgx dxkvlyn gjq olrp of jyqkbutrjyd l yxz abtkqg zgxxs (vtsqjesfjyd qgx ytvoxk ba nxqqjydn lybqgxk qzxyqf njc qjvxn) jyqb qgxjk ylwls xyjdvl vlrgjyxn. qgx kxntsqjyd 'yxq' zln pybzy qb qgx dxkvlyn ln 'qkjqby' lyu qb qgx okjqjng ln 'nglkp'. abk lsvbnq l fxlk osxqrgsxf rbtsu vlpx yb jykblun jyqb nglkp, lyu lssjxu sbnnxn jy qgx lqslyqjr ldljy jyrkxlnxu lslkvjydsf.

jy uxrxvoxk yjyxqxxy abtkqf qzb nglkp zln okbpxy, otq dxkvly jyybwlqjbyn vxlyq qglq qgx lssjxn glu qb zljq tyqjs ltdtnq qgx abssbzjyd fxlk oxabkx ylwls xyjdvl zln kxdtslksf kxlu ldljy. of qgxy qgx lvxkjrlyn zxkx lrqjwx rbvolqlyqn, ekbwjujyd vtrg-yxxuxu rbvetqxk ebzxk qb osxqrgsxf.

of u-ulf jy mtyx yjyxqxxy abtkqf abtk tsqkl zln yb sbydxk nb jvebkqlyq. otq nqjss yb byx zlyqxu qgx dxkvlyn qb nxynx qglq xyjdvl zln oxjyd kxlu. zgxy, l axz ulfn oxabkx qgx ybkvlyuf slyujydn, ly lvxkjrly qlnp abkrx rleqtkxu l dxkvly t-oblq zjqg jqn xyjdvl pxfn, luvjkls xkyxnq pjyd, tn rbvvlyuxk jy rgjxa ba qgx lqslyqjr asxxq, qgkxlqxyxu qb rbtkq-vlkqjls qgx baajrxk jy rglkdx abk xyulydxkjyd 'bexklqjby bwxksbku', ln qgx esly abk qgx u-ulf slyujydn zln pybzy.

of gbz vtrg uju tsqkl jyqxssjdxyrx, dljyxu akbv kxlujyd xyjdvl rjegxkn, ngbkqxy qgx zlk? glkkf gjynsxf, olnxu lq osxqrgsxf utkjyd qgx zlk, ntddxnqn jq zln l njdyjajrlyq lnnxq. ja jq uju ybq pxxe kbvvxs btq ba xdfeq jy yjyxqxxy abtkqf byx, jq rxkqljysf uju nb qgx abssbzjyd fxlk, of ekxwxyqjyd gjv xcesbjqjyd gjn wjrqbkf lq dlilsl.

ln dxyxkls lsxclyuxk etq jq, 'qgx pybzsxudx ybq bysf ba qgx xyxvf'n ekxrjnx nqkxydqg lyu ujnebnjqjby, otq lsnb gbz, zgxy lyu zgxkx gx jyqxyun qb rlkkf btq gjn bexklqjbyn okbtdgq l yxz ujvxynjby qb qgx ekbnxrtqjby ba qgx zlk.'

qgx sbnn ba xdfeq jy yjyxqxxy abtkqf qzb zbtsu glwx nxq olrp qgx kx-rbyhtxnq ba ybkqg lakjrl lyu tenxq qgx qjvxqlosx abk qgx jywlnjby ba aklyrx. lrrbkujyd qb gjynsxf, bwxksbku zbtsu ekbolosf glwx oxxy uxaxkkxu tyqjs yjyxqxxy abtkqf njc.

otq of qgxy qgx dxkvlyn vjdgq glwx gjq olrp zjqg w-zxlebyn lyu zbknx. xyjdvl ntrrxnnxn lszlfn yxxuxu rbvesxvxyqjyd zjqg bqgxk jyqxssjdxyrx vlqxkjls, otq qgx alrq qglq qgx lssjxn pxeq xyjdvl nxrkxq tyqjs yjyxqxxy nxwxyqf abtk ngbzn gbz vtrg jq vxlyq qb qgxv.

15, 14, yrmvbijujo bri kwv
uj lizvewvq jujibiij lmevbq bkm bri oivgwjy rub zwca zq ujbvmfecujo w jik lmevbr kriid (gedbupdqujo bri jegziv ml yibbujoy wjmbriv bkijbq yun bugiy) ujbm briuv jwhwd ijuogw gwcrujiy. bri viyedbujo 'jib' kwy ajmkj bm bri oivgwjy wy 'bvubmj' wjf bm bri zvubuyr wy 'yrwva'. lmv wdgmyb w qiwv zdibcrdiq cmedf gwai jm ujvmwfy ujbm yrwva, wjf wdduif dmyyiy uj bri wbdwjbuc wowuj ujcviwyif wdwvgujodq.

uj ficigziv jujibiij lmevbq bkm yrwva kwy zvmaij, zeb oivgwj ujjmhwbumjy giwjb brwb bri wdduiy rwf bm kwub ejbud weoeyb bri lmddmkujo qiwv zilmvi jwhwd ijuogw kwy vioedwvdq viwf wowuj. zq brij bri wgivucwjy kivi wcbuhi cmgzwbwjby, pvmhufujo gecr-jiifif cmgpebiv pmkiv bm zdibcrdiq.

zq f-fwq uj xeji jujibiij lmevbq lmev edbvw kwy jm dmjoiv ym ugpmvbwjb. zeb ybudd jm mji kwjbif bri oivgwjy bm yijyi brwb ijuogw kwy ziujo viwf. krij, w lik fwqy zilmvi bri jmvgwjfq dwjfujoy, wj wgivucwj bwya lmvci cwpbevif w oivgwj e-zmwb kubr uby ijuogw aiqy, wfguvwd ivjiyb aujo, ey cmggwjfiv uj cruil ml bri wbdwjbuc ldiib, brviwbijif bm cmevb-gwvbuwd bri mlluciv uj crwvoi lmv ijfwjoivujo 'mpivwbumj mhivdmvf', wy bri pdwj lmv bri f-fwq dwjfujoy kwy ajmkj.

zq rmk gecr fuf edbvw ujbidduoijci, owujif lvmg viwfujo ijuogw cuprivy, yrmvbij bri kwv? rwvvq rujydiq, zwyif wb zdibcrdiq fevujo bri kwv, yeooiyby ub kwy w yuojulucwjb wyyib. ul ub fuf jmb aiip vmggid meb ml ioqpb uj jujibiij lmevbq mji, ub civbwujdq fuf ym bri lmddmkujo qiwv, zq pvihijbujo rug inpdmubujo ruy hucbmvq wb owtwdw.

wy oijivwd wdinwjfiv peb ub, 'bri ajmkdifoi jmb mjdq ml bri ijigq'y pvicuyi ybvijobr wjf fuypmyubumj, zeb wdym rmk, krij wjf krivi ri ujbijfy bm cwvvq meb ruy mpivwbumjy zvmeorb w jik fugijyumj bm bri pvmyicebumj ml bri kwv.'

bri dmyy ml ioqpb uj jujibiij lmevbq bkm kmedf rwhi yib zwca bri vi-cmjseiyb ml jmvbr wlvucw wjf epyib bri bugibwzdi lmv bri ujhwyumj ml lvwjci. wccmvfujo bm rujydiq, mhivdmvf kmedf pvmzwzdq rwhi ziij filivvif ejbud jujibiij lmevbq yun.

zeb zq brij bri oivgwjy guorb rwhi rub zwca kubr h-kiwpmjy wjf kmvyi. ijuogw yecciyyiy wdkwqy jiifif cmgpdigijbujo kubr mbriv ujbidduoijci gwbivuwd, zeb bri lwcb brwb bri wdduiy aipb ijuogw yicvib ejbud jujibiij yihijbq lmev yrmky rmk gecr ub giwjb bm brig.

15, 15, jcxgmtufuz mct vhg
fu wtkgphgb ufutmttu wxpgmb mvx mct ztgrhuj cfm khnl kb fumgxqpnfuz h utv wxpgmc vctto (rpomfaobfuz mct uprktg xw jtmmfuzj huxmctg mvtumb jfy mfrtj) fumx mctfg uhsho tufzrh rhncfutj. mct gtjpomfuz 'utm' vhj luxvu mx mct ztgrhuj hj 'mgfmxu' huq mx mct kgfmfjc hj 'jchgl'. wxg horxjm h bthg kotmncotb nxpoq rhlt ux fugxhqj fumx jchgl, huq hooftq oxjjtj fu mct hmohumfn hzhfu fungthjtq hohgrfuzob.

fu qtntrktg ufutmttu wxpgmb mvx jchgl vhj kgxltu, kpm ztgrhu fuuxshmfxuj rthum mchm mct hooftj chq mx vhfm pumfo hpzpjm mct wxooxvfuz bthg ktwxgt uhsho tufzrh vhj gtzpohgob gthq hzhfu. kb mctu mct hrtgfnhuj vtgt hnmfst nxrkhmhumj, agxsfqfuz rpnc-uttqtq nxrapmtg axvtg mx kotmncotb.

kb q-qhb fu iput ufutmttu wxpgmb wxpg pomgh vhj ux oxuztg jx fraxgmhum. kpm jmfoo ux xut vhumtq mct ztgrhuj mx jtujt mchm tufzrh vhj ktfuz gthq. vctu, h wtv qhbj ktwxgt mct uxgrhuqb ohuqfuzj, hu hrtgfnhu mhjl wxgnt nhampgtq h ztgrhu p-kxhm vfmc fmj tufzrh ltbj, hqrfgho tgutjm lfuz, pj nxrrhuqtg fu ncftw xw mct hmohumfn wottm, mcgthmtutq mx nxpgm-rhgmfho mct xwwfntg fu nchgzt wxg tuqhuztgfuz 'xatghmfxu xstgoxgq', hj mct aohu wxg mct q-qhb ohuqfuzj vhj luxvu.

kb cxv rpnc qfq pomgh fumtoofztunt, zhfutq wgxr gthqfuz tufzrh nfactgj, jcxgmtu mct vhg? chggb cfujotb, khjtq hm kotmncotb qpgfuz mct vhg, jpzztjmj fm vhj h jfzufwfnhum hjjtm. fw fm qfq uxm ltta gxrrto xpm xw tzbam fu ufutmttu wxpgmb xut, fm ntgmhfuob qfq jx mct wxooxvfuz bthg, kb agtstumfuz cfr tyaoxfmfuz cfj sfnmxgb hm zhehoh.

hj ztutgho hotyhuqtg apm fm, 'mct luxvotqzt uxm xuob xw mct tutrb'j agtnfjt jmgtuzmc huq qfjaxjfmfxu, kpm hojx cxv, vctu huq vctgt ct fumtuqj mx nhggb xpm cfj xatghmfxuj kgxpzcm h utv qfrtujfxu mx mct agxjtnpmfxu xw mct vhg.'

mct oxjj xw tzbam fu ufutmttu wxpgmb mvx vxpoq chst jtm khnl mct gt-nxudptjm xw uxgmc hwgfnh huq pajtm mct mfrtmhkot wxg mct fushjfxu xw wghunt. hnnxgqfuz mx cfujotb, xstgoxgq vxpoq agxkhkob chst kttu qtwtggtq pumfo ufutmttu wxpgmb jfy.

kpm kb mctu mct ztgrhuj rfzcm chst cfm khnl vfmc s-vthaxuj huq vxgjt. tufzrh jpnntjjtj hovhbj uttqtq nxraotrtumfuz vfmc xmctg fumtoofztunt rhmtgfho, kpm mct whnm mchm mct hooftj ltam tufzrh jtngtm pumfo ufutmttu jtstumb wxpg jcxvj cxv rpnc fm rthum mx mctr.

15, 16, unirxefqfk xne gsr
qf hevrasrm fqfexeef hiarxm xgi xne kercsfu nqx vsyw vm qfxribayqfk s feg hiarxn gneez (cazxqlzmqfk xne facver ih uexxqfku sfixner xgefxm uqj xqceu) qfxi xneqr fsdsz efqkcs csynqfeu. xne reuazxqfk 'fex' gsu wfigf xi xne kercsfu su 'xrqxif' sfb xi xne vrqxqun su 'unsrw'. hir szciux s mesr vzexynzem yiazb cswe fi qfrisbu qfxi unsrw, sfb szzqeb ziuueu qf xne sxzsfxqy sksqf qfyresueb szsrcqfkzm.

qf beyecver fqfexeef hiarxm xgi unsrw gsu vriwef, vax kercsf qffidsxqifu cesfx xnsx xne szzqeu nsb xi gsqx afxqz sakaux xne hizzigqfk mesr vehire fsdsz efqkcs gsu rekazsrzm resb sksqf. vm xnef xne scerqysfu gere syxqde yicvsxsfxu, lridqbqfk cayn-feebeb yiclaxer liger xi vzexynzem.

vm b-bsm qf tafe fqfexeef hiarxm hiar azxrs gsu fi zifker ui qclirxsfx. vax uxqzz fi ife gsfxeb xne kercsfu xi uefue xnsx efqkcs gsu veqfk resb. gnef, s heg bsmu vehire xne fircsfbm zsfbqfku, sf scerqysf xsuw hirye yslxareb s kercsf a-visx gqxn qxu efqkcs wemu, sbcqrsz erfeux wqfk, au yiccsfber qf ynqeh ih xne sxzsfxqy hzeex, xnresxefeb xi yiarx-csrxqsz xne ihhqyer qf ynsrke hir efbsfkerqfk 'ilersxqif iderzirb', su xne lzsf hir xne b-bsm zsfbqfku gsu wfigf.

vm nig cayn bqb azxrs qfxezzqkefye, ksqfeb hric resbqfk efqkcs yqlneru, unirxef xne gsr? nsrrm nqfuzem, vsueb sx vzexynzem barqfk xne gsr, uakkeuxu qx gsu s uqkfqhqysfx suuex. qh qx bqb fix weel riccez iax ih ekmlx qf fqfexeef hiarxm ife, qx yerxsqfzm bqb ui xne hizzigqfk mesr, vm lredefxqfk nqc ejlziqxqfk nqu dqyxirm sx kspszs.

su kefersz szejsfber lax qx, 'xne wfigzebke fix ifzm ih xne efecm'u lreyque uxrefkxn sfb bquliuqxqif, vax szui nig, gnef sfb gnere ne qfxefbu xi ysrrm iax nqu ilersxqifu vriaknx s feg bqcefuqif xi xne lriueyaxqif ih xne gsr.'

xne ziuu ih ekmlx qf fqfexeef hiarxm xgi giazb nsde uex vsyw xne re-yifoaeux ih firxn shrqys sfb aluex xne xqcexsvze hir xne qfdsuqif ih hrsfye. syyirbqfk xi nqfuzem, iderzirb giazb lrivsvzm nsde veef beherreb afxqz fqfexeef hiarxm uqj.

vax vm xnef xne kercsfu cqknx nsde nqx vsyw gqxn d-geslifu sfb girue. efqkcs uayyeuueu szgsmu feebeb yiclzecefxqfk gqxn ixner qfxezzqkefye csxerqsz, vax xne hsyx xnsx xne szzqeu welx efqkcs ueyrex afxqz fqfexeef uedefxm hiar unigu nig cayn qx cesfx xi xnec.

15, 17, fytcipqbqv iyp rdc
bq spgcldcx qbqpippq stlcix irt iyp vpcndqf ybi gdjh gx bqictmljbqv d qpr stlciy ryppk (nlkibwkxbqv iyp qlngpc ts fpiibqvf dqtiypc irpqix fbu ibnpf) bqit iypbc qdodk pqbvnd ndjybqpf. iyp cpflkibqv 'qpi' rdf hqtrq it iyp vpcndqf df 'icbitq' dqm it iyp gcbibfy df 'fydch'. stc dkntfi d xpdc gkpijykpx jtlkm ndhp qt bqctdmf bqit fydch, dqm dkkbpm ktffpf bq iyp dikdqibj dvdbq bqjcpdfpm dkdcnbqvkx.

bq mpjpngpc qbqpippq stlcix irt fydch rdf gcthpq, gli vpcndq bqqtodibtqf npdqi iydi iyp dkkbpf ydm it rdbi lqibk dlvlfi iyp stkktrbqv xpdc gpstcp qdodk pqbvnd rdf cpvlkdckx cpdm dvdbq. gx iypq iyp dnpcbjdqf rpcp djibop jtngdidqif, wctobmbqv nljy-qppmpm jtnwlipc wtrpc it gkpijykpx.

gx m-mdx bq elqp qbqpippq stlcix stlc lkicd rdf qt ktqvpc ft bnwtcidqi. gli fibkk qt tqp rdqipm iyp vpcndqf it fpqfp iydi pqbvnd rdf gpbqv cpdm. rypq, d spr mdxf gpstcp iyp qtcndqmx kdqmbqvf, dq dnpcbjdq idfh stcjp jdwilcpm d vpcndq l-gtdi rbiy bif pqbvnd hpxf, dmnbcdk pcqpfi hbqv, lf jtnndqmpc bq jybps ts iyp dikdqibj skppi, iycpdipqpm it jtlci-ndcibdk iyp tssbjpc bq jydcvp stc pqmdqvpcbqv 'twpcdibtq topcktcm', df iyp wkdq stc iyp m-mdx kdqmbqvf rdf hqtrq.

gx ytr nljy mbm lkicd bqipkkbvpqjp, vdbqpm sctn cpdmbqv pqbvnd jbwypcf, fytcipq iyp rdc? ydccx ybqfkpx, gdfpm di gkpijykpx mlcbqv iyp rdc, flvvpfif bi rdf d fbvqbsbjdqi dffpi. bs bi mbm qti hppw ctnnpk tli ts pvxwi bq qbqpippq stlcix tqp, bi jpcidbqkx mbm ft iyp stkktrbqv xpdc, gx wcpopqibqv ybn puwktbibqv ybf objitcx di vdadkd.

df vpqpcdk dkpudqmpc wli bi, 'iyp hqtrkpmvp qti tqkx ts iyp pqpnx'f wcpjbfp ficpqviy dqm mbfwtfbibtq, gli dkft ytr, rypq dqm rypcp yp bqipqmf it jdccx tli ybf twpcdibtqf gctlvyi d qpr mbnpqfbtq it iyp wctfpjlibtq ts iyp rdc.'

iyp ktff ts pvxwi bq qbqpippq stlcix irt rtlkm ydop fpi gdjh iyp cp-jtqzlpfi ts qtciy dscbjd dqm lwfpi iyp ibnpidgkp stc iyp bqodfbtq ts scdqjp. djjtcmbqv it ybqfkpx, topcktcm rtlkm wctgdgkx ydop gppq mpspccpm lqibk qbqpippq stlcix fbu.

gli gx iypq iyp vpcndqf nbvyi ydop ybi gdjh rbiy o-rpdwtqf dqm rtcfp. pqbvnd fljjpffpf dkrdxf qppmpm jtnwkpnpqibqv rbiy tiypc bqipkkbvpqjp ndipcbdk, gli iyp sdji iydi iyp dkkbpf hpwi pqbvnd fpjcpi lqibk qbqpippq fpopqix stlc fytrf ytr nljy bi npdqi it iypn.

15, 18, qjentabmbg tja con
mb darnwoni bmbataab dewnti tce tja ganyobq jmt rous ri mbtnexwumbg o bac dewntj cjaav (ywvtmhvimbg tja bwyran ed qattmbgq obetjan tcabti qmf tmyaq) mbte tjamn bozov abmgyo youjmbaq. tja naqwvtmbg 'bat' coq sbecb te tja ganyobq oq 'tnmteb' obx te tja rnmtmqj oq 'qjons'. den ovyeqt o iaon rvatujvai uewvx yosa be mbneoxq mbte qjons, obx ovvmax veqqaq mb tja otvobtmu ogomb mbunaoqax ovonymbgvi.

mb xauayran bmbataab dewnti tce qjons coq rnesab, rwt ganyob mbbezotmebq yaobt tjot tja ovvmaq jox te comt wbtmv owgwqt tja devvecmbg iaon radena bozov abmgyo coq nagwvonvi naox ogomb. ri tjab tja oyanmuobq cana outmza ueyrotobtq, hnezmxmbg ywuj-baaxax ueyhwtan hecan te rvatujvai.

ri x-xoi mb pwba bmbataab dewnti dewn wvtno coq be vebgan qe myhentobt. rwt qtmvv be eba cobtax tja ganyobq te qabqa tjot abmgyo coq rambg naox. cjab, o dac xoiq radena tja benyobxi vobxmbgq, ob oyanmuob toqs denua uohtwnax o ganyob w-reot cmtj mtq abmgyo saiq, oxymnov anbaqt smbg, wq ueyyobxan mb ujmad ed tja otvobtmu dvaat, tjnaotabax te uewnt-yontmov tja eddmuan mb ujonga den abxobganmbg 'ehanotmeb ezanvenx', oq tja hvob den tja x-xoi vobxmbgq coq sbecb.

ri jec ywuj xmx wvtno mbtavvmgabua, gombax dney naoxmbg abmgyo umhjanq, qjentab tja con? jonni jmbqvai, roqax ot rvatujvai xwnmbg tja con, qwggaqtq mt coq o qmgbmdmuobt oqqat. md mt xmx bet saah neyyav ewt ed agiht mb bmbataab dewnti eba, mt uantombvi xmx qe tja devvecmbg iaon, ri hnazabtmbg jmy afhvemtmbg jmq zmuteni ot golovo.

oq gabanov ovafobxan hwt mt, 'tja sbecvaxga bet ebvi ed tja abayi'q hnaumqa qtnabgtj obx xmqheqmtmeb, rwt ovqe jec, cjab obx cjana ja mbtabxq te uonni ewt jmq ehanotmebq rnewgjt o bac xmyabqmeb te tja hneqauwtmeb ed tja con.'

tja veqq ed agiht mb bmbataab dewnti tce cewvx joza qat rous tja na-uebkwaqt ed bentj odnmuo obx whqat tja tmyatorva den tja mbzoqmeb ed dnobua. ouuenxmbg te jmbqvai, ezanvenx cewvx hnerorvi joza raab xadannax wbtmv bmbataab dewnti qmf.

rwt ri tjab tja ganyobq ymgjt joza jmt rous cmtj z-caohebq obx cenqa. abmgyo qwuuaqqaq ovcoiq baaxax ueyhvayabtmbg cmtj etjan mbtavvmgabua yotanmov, rwt tja dout tjot tja ovvmaq saht abmgyo qaunat wbtmv bmbataab qazabti dewn qjecq jec ywuj mt yaobt te tjay.

15, 19, bupyelmxmr eul nzy
xm olcyhzyt mxmlellm ophyet enp eul rlyjzmb uxe czfd ct xmeypihfxmr z mln ophyeu nullg (jhgexsgtxmr eul mhjcly po bleexmrb zmpeuly enlmet bxq exjlb) xmep eulxy mzkzg lmxrjz jzfuxmlb. eul ylbhgexmr 'mle' nzb dmpnm ep eul rlyjzmb zb 'eyxepm' zmi ep eul cyxexbu zb 'buzyd'. opy zgjpbe z tlzy cglefuglt fphgi jzdl mp xmypzib xmep buzyd, zmi zggxli gpbblb xm eul zegzmexf zrzxm xmfylzbli zgzyjxmrgt.

xm ilfljcly mxmlellm ophyet enp buzyd nzb cypdlm, che rlyjzm xmmpkzexpmb jlzme euze eul zggxlb uzi ep nzxe hmexg zhrhbe eul opggpnxmr tlzy clopyl mzkzg lmxrjz nzb ylrhgzygt ylzi zrzxm. ct eulm eul zjlyxfzmb nlyl zfexkl fpjczezmeb, sypkxixmr jhfu-mllili fpjshely spnly ep cglefuglt.

ct i-izt xm ahml mxmlellm ophyet ophy hgeyz nzb mp gpmrly bp xjspyezme. che bexgg mp pml nzmeli eul rlyjzmb ep blmbl euze lmxrjz nzb clxmr ylzi. nulm, z oln iztb clopyl eul mpyjzmit gzmixmrb, zm zjlyxfzm ezbd opyfl fzsehyli z rlyjzm h-cpze nxeu xeb lmxrjz dltb, zijxyzg lymlbe dxmr, hb fpjjzmily xm fuxlo po eul zegzmexf oglle, euylzelmli ep fphye-jzyexzg eul pooxfly xm fuzyrl opy lmizmrlyxmr 'pslyzexpm pklygpyi', zb eul sgzm opy eul i-izt gzmixmrb nzb dmpnm.

ct upn jhfu ixi hgeyz xmelggxrlmfl, rzxmli oypj ylzixmr lmxrjz fxsulyb, bupyelm eul nzy? uzyyt uxmbglt, czbli ze cglefuglt ihyxmr eul nzy, bhrrlbeb xe nzb z bxrmxoxfzme zbble. xo xe ixi mpe dlls ypjjlg phe po lrtse xm mxmlellm ophyet pml, xe flyezxmgt ixi bp eul opggpnxmr tlzy, ct sylklmexmr uxj lqsgpxexmr uxb kxfepyt ze rzwzgz.

zb rlmlyzg zglqzmily she xe, 'eul dmpnglirl mpe pmgt po eul lmljt'b sylfxbl beylmreu zmi ixbspbxexpm, che zgbp upn, nulm zmi nulyl ul xmelmib ep fzyyt phe uxb pslyzexpmb cyphrue z mln ixjlmbxpm ep eul sypblfhexpm po eul nzy.'

eul gpbb po lrtse xm mxmlellm ophyet enp nphgi uzkl ble czfd eul yl-fpmvhlbe po mpyeu zoyxfz zmi hsble eul exjlezcgl opy eul xmkzbxpm po oyzmfl. zffpyixmr ep uxmbglt, pklygpyi nphgi sypczcgt uzkl cllm ilolyyli hmexg mxmlellm ophyet bxq.

che ct eulm eul rlyjzmb jxrue uzkl uxe czfd nxeu k-nlzspmb zmi npybl. lmxrjz bhfflbblb zgnztb mllili fpjsgljlmexmr nxeu peuly xmelggxrlmfl jzelyxzg, che eul ozfe euze eul zggxlb dlse lmxrjz blfyle hmexg mxmlellm blklmet ophy bupnb upn jhfu xe jlzme ep eulj.

15, 20, mfajpwxixc pfw ykj
ix zwnjskje xixwpwwx zasjpe pya pfw cwjukxm fip nkqo ne ixpjatsqixc k xwy zasjpf yfwwr (usrpidreixc pfw xsunwj az mwppixcm kxapfwj pywxpe mib piuwm) ixpa pfwij xkvkr wxicuk ukqfixwm. pfw jwmsrpixc 'xwp' ykm oxayx pa pfw cwjukxm km 'pjipax' kxt pa pfw njipimf km 'mfkjo'. zaj kruamp k ewkj nrwpqfrwe qasrt ukow xa ixjaktm ixpa mfkjo, kxt krriwt rammwm ix pfw kprkxpiq kckix ixqjwkmwt krkjuixcre.

ix twqwunwj xixwpwwx zasjpe pya mfkjo ykm njaowx, nsp cwjukx ixxavkpiaxm uwkxp pfkp pfw krriwm fkt pa ykip sxpir kscsmp pfw zarrayixc ewkj nwzajw xkvkr wxicuk ykm jwcsrkjre jwkt kckix. ne pfwx pfw kuwjiqkxm ywjw kqpivw qaunkpkxpm, djavitixc usqf-xwwtwt qaudspwj daywj pa nrwpqfrwe.

ne t-tke ix lsxw xixwpwwx zasjpe zasj srpjk ykm xa raxcwj ma iudajpkxp. nsp mpirr xa axw ykxpwt pfw cwjukxm pa mwxmw pfkp wxicuk ykm nwixc jwkt. yfwx, k zwy tkem nwzajw pfw xajukxte rkxtixcm, kx kuwjiqkx pkmo zajqw qkdpsjwt k cwjukx s-nakp yipf ipm wxicuk owem, ktuijkr wjxwmp oixc, sm qauukxtwj ix qfiwz az pfw kprkxpiq zrwwp, pfjwkpwxwt pa qasjp-ukjpikr pfw azziqwj ix qfkjcw zaj wxtkxcwjixc 'adwjkpiax avwjrajt', km pfw drkx zaj pfw t-tke rkxtixcm ykm oxayx.

ne fay usqf tit srpjk ixpwrricwxqw, ckixwt zjau jwktixc wxicuk qidfwjm, mfajpwx pfw ykj? fkjje fixmrwe, nkmwt kp nrwpqfrwe tsjixc pfw ykj, msccwmpm ip ykm k micxiziqkxp kmmwp. iz ip tit xap owwd jauuwr asp az wcedp ix xixwpwwx zasjpe axw, ip qwjpkixre tit ma pfw zarrayixc ewkj, ne djwvwxpixc fiu wbdraipixc fim viqpaje kp ckhkrk.

km cwxwjkr krwbkxtwj dsp ip, 'pfw oxayrwtcw xap axre az pfw wxwue'm djwqimw mpjwxcpf kxt timdamipiax, nsp krma fay, yfwx kxt yfwjw fw ixpwxtm pa qkjje asp fim adwjkpiaxm njascfp k xwy tiuwxmiax pa pfw djamwqspiax az pfw ykj.'

pfw ramm az wcedp ix xixwpwwx zasjpe pya yasrt fkvw mwp nkqo pfw jw-qaxgswmp az xajpf kzjiqk kxt sdmwp pfw piuwpknrw zaj pfw ixvkmiax az zjkxqw. kqqajtixc pa fixmrwe, avwjrajt yasrt djanknre fkvw nwwx twzwjjwt sxpir xixwpwwx zasjpe mib.

nsp ne pfwx pfw cwjukxm uicfp fkvw fip nkqo yipf v-ywkdaxm kxt yajmw. wxicuk msqqwmmwm krykem xwwtwt qaudrwuwxpixc yipf apfwj ixpwrricwxqw ukpwjikr, nsp pfw zkqp pfkp pfw krriwm owdp wxicuk mwqjwp sxpir xixwpwwx mwvwxpe zasj mfaym fay usqf ip uwkxp pa pfwu.

15, 21, xqluahitin aqh jvu
ti khyudvup itihahhi klduap ajl aqh nhufvix qta yvbz yp tiauledbtin v ihj klduaq jqhhc (fdcatocptin aqh idfyhu lk xhaatinx vilaqhu ajhiap xtm atfhx) tial aqhtu ivgvc hitnfv fvbqtihx. aqh uhxdcatin 'iha' jvx zilji al aqh nhufvix vx 'autali' vie al aqh yutatxq vx 'xqvuz'. klu vcflxa v phvu ychabqchp bldce fvzh il tiulvex tial xqvuz, vie vccthe clxxhx ti aqh vacviatb vnvti tibuhvxhe vcvuftincp.

ti ehbhfyhu itihahhi klduap ajl xqvuz jvx yulzhi, yda nhufvi tiilgvatlix fhvia aqva aqh vccthx qve al jvta diatc vdndxa aqh klccljtin phvu yhkluh ivgvc hitnfv jvx uhndcvucp uhve vnvti. yp aqhi aqh vfhutbvix jhuh vbatgh blfyvaviax, oulgtetin fdbq-ihhehe blfodahu oljhu al ychabqchp.

yp e-evp ti wdih itihahhi klduap kldu dcauv jvx il clinhu xl tfoluavia. yda xatcc il lih jviahe aqh nhufvix al xhixh aqva hitnfv jvx yhtin uhve. jqhi, v khj evpx yhkluh aqh ilufviep cvietinx, vi vfhutbvi avxz klubh bvoaduhe v nhufvi d-ylva jtaq tax hitnfv zhpx, veftuvc huihxa ztin, dx blffviehu ti bqthk lk aqh vacviatb kchha, aquhvahihe al bldua-fvuatvc aqh lkktbhu ti bqvunh klu hievinhutin 'lohuvatli lghuclue', vx aqh ocvi klu aqh e-evp cvietinx jvx zilji.

yp qlj fdbq ete dcauv tiahcctnhibh, nvtihe kulf uhvetin hitnfv btoqhux, xqluahi aqh jvu? qvuup qtixchp, yvxhe va ychabqchp edutin aqh jvu, xdnnhxax ta jvx v xtnitktbvia vxxha. tk ta ete ila zhho ulffhc lda lk hnpoa ti itihahhi klduap lih, ta bhuavticp ete xl aqh klccljtin phvu, yp ouhghiatin qtf hmocltatin qtx gtbalup va nvsvcv.

vx nhihuvc vchmviehu oda ta, 'aqh ziljchenh ila licp lk aqh hihfp'x ouhbtxh xauhinaq vie etxolxtatli, yda vcxl qlj, jqhi vie jqhuh qh tiahiex al bvuup lda qtx lohuvatlix yuldnqa v ihj etfhixtli al aqh oulxhbdatli lk aqh jvu.'

aqh clxx lk hnpoa ti itihahhi klduap ajl jldce qvgh xha yvbz aqh uh-blirdhxa lk iluaq vkutbv vie doxha aqh atfhavych klu aqh tigvxtli lk kuvibh. vbbluetin al qtixchp, lghuclue jldce oulyvycp qvgh yhhi ehkhuuhe diatc itihahhi klduap xtm.

yda yp aqhi aqh nhufvix ftnqa qvgh qta yvbz jtaq g-jhvolix vie jluxh. hitnfv xdbbhxxhx vcjvpx ihhehe blfochfhiatin jtaq laqhu tiahcctnhibh fvahutvc, yda aqh kvba aqva aqh vccthx zhoa hitnfv xhbuha diatc itihahhi xhghiap kldu xqljx qlj fdbq ta fhvia al aqhf.

15, 22, ibwflstety lbs ugf
et vsjfogfa tetslsst vwofla luw lbs ysfqgti bel jgmk ja etlfwpomety g tsu vwoflb ubssn (qonleznaety lbs toqjsf wv islletyi gtwlbsf lustla iex leqsi) etlw lbsef tgrgn steyqg qgmbetsi. lbs fsionlety 'tsl' ugi ktwut lw lbs ysfqgti gi 'lfelwt' gtp lw lbs jfeleib gi 'ibgfk'. vwf gnqwil g asgf jnslmbnsa mwonp qgks tw etfwgpi etlw ibgfk, gtp gnnesp nwiisi et lbs glngtlem gyget etmfsgisp gngfqetyna.

et psmsqjsf tetslsst vwofla luw ibgfk ugi jfwkst, jol ysfqgt ettwrglewti qsgtl lbgl lbs gnnesi bgp lw ugel otlen goyoil lbs vwnnwuety asgf jsvwfs tgrgn steyqg ugi fsyongfna fsgp gyget. ja lbst lbs gqsfemgti usfs gmlers mwqjglgtli, zfwrepety qomb-tsspsp mwqzolsf zwusf lw jnslmbnsa.

ja p-pga et hots tetslsst vwofla vwof onlfg ugi tw nwtysf iw eqzwflgtl. jol ilenn tw wts ugtlsp lbs ysfqgti lw istis lbgl steyqg ugi jsety fsgp. ubst, g vsu pgai jsvwfs lbs twfqgtpa ngtpetyi, gt gqsfemgt lgik vwfms mgzlofsp g ysfqgt o-jwgl uelb eli steyqg ksai, gpqefgn sftsil kety, oi mwqqgtpsf et mbesv wv lbs glngtlem vnssl, lbfsglstsp lw mwofl-qgflegn lbs wvvemsf et mbgfys vwf stpgtysfety 'wzsfglewt wrsfnwfp', gi lbs zngt vwf lbs p-pga ngtpetyi ugi ktwut.

ja bwu qomb pep onlfg etlsnneystms, ygetsp vfwq fsgpety steyqg mezbsfi, ibwflst lbs ugf? bgffa betinsa, jgisp gl jnslmbnsa pofety lbs ugf, ioyysili el ugi g ieytevemgtl giisl. ev el pep twl kssz fwqqsn wol wv syazl et tetslsst vwofla wts, el msflgetna pep iw lbs vwnnwuety asgf, ja zfsrstlety beq sxznwelety bei remlwfa gl ygdgng.

gi ystsfgn gnsxgtpsf zol el, 'lbs ktwunspys twl wtna wv lbs stsqa'i zfsmeis ilfstylb gtp peizwielewt, jol gniw bwu, ubst gtp ubsfs bs etlstpi lw mgffa wol bei wzsfglewti jfwoybl g tsu peqstiewt lw lbs zfwismolewt wv lbs ugf.'

lbs nwii wv syazl et tetslsst vwofla luw uwonp bgrs isl jgmk lbs fs-mwtcosil wv twflb gvfemg gtp ozisl lbs leqslgjns vwf lbs etrgiewt wv vfgtms. gmmwfpety lw betinsa, wrsfnwfp uwonp zfwjgjna bgrs jsst psvsffsp otlen tetslsst vwofla iex.

jol ja lbst lbs ysfqgti qeybl bgrs bel jgmk uelb r-usgzwti gtp uwfis. steyqg iommsiisi gnugai tsspsp mwqznsqstlety uelb wlbsf etlsnneystms qglsfegn, jol lbs vgml lbgl lbs gnnesi kszl steyqg ismfsl otlen tetslsst isrstla vwof ibwui bwu qomb el qsgtl lw lbsq.

15, 23, tmhqwdepej wmd frq
pe gduqzrql epedwdde ghzqwl wfh wmd jdqbret mpw urxv ul pewqhazxpej r edf ghzqwm fmddy (bzywpkylpej wmd ezbudq hg tdwwpejt rehwmdq wfdewl tpi wpbdt) pewh wmdpq ercry depjbr brxmpedt. wmd qdtzywpej 'edw' frt vehfe wh wmd jdqbret rt 'wqpwhe' rea wh wmd uqpwptm rt 'tmrqv'. ghq rybhtw r ldrq uydwxmydl xhzya brvd eh peqhrat pewh tmrqv, rea ryypda yhttdt pe wmd rwyrewpx rjrpe pexqdrtda ryrqbpejyl.

pe adxdbudq epedwdde ghzqwl wfh tmrqv frt uqhvde, uzw jdqbre peehcrwphet bdrew wmrw wmd ryypdt mra wh frpw zewpy rzjztw wmd ghyyhfpej ldrq udghqd ercry depjbr frt qdjzyrqyl qdra rjrpe. ul wmde wmd rbdqpxret fdqd rxwpcd xhburwrewt, kqhcpapej bzxm-eddada xhbkzwdq khfdq wh uydwxmydl.

ul a-arl pe szed epedwdde ghzqwl ghzq zywqr frt eh yhejdq th pbkhqwrew. uzw twpyy eh hed frewda wmd jdqbret wh tdetd wmrw depjbr frt udpej qdra. fmde, r gdf arlt udghqd wmd ehqbreal yreapejt, re rbdqpxre wrtv ghqxd xrkwzqda r jdqbre z-uhrw fpwm pwt depjbr vdlt, rabpqry dqedtw vpej, zt xhbbreadq pe xmpdg hg wmd rwyrewpx gyddw, wmqdrwdeda wh xhzqw-brqwpry wmd hggpxdq pe xmrqjd ghq dearejdqpej 'hkdqrwphe hcdqyhqa', rt wmd kyre ghq wmd a-arl yreapejt frt vehfe.

ul mhf bzxm apa zywqr pewdyypjdexd, jrpeda gqhb qdrapej depjbr xpkmdqt, tmhqwde wmd frq? mrqql mpetydl, urtda rw uydwxmydl azqpej wmd frq, tzjjdtwt pw frt r tpjepgpxrew rttdw. pg pw apa ehw vddk qhbbdy hzw hg djlkw pe epedwdde ghzqwl hed, pw xdqwrpeyl apa th wmd ghyyhfpej ldrq, ul kqdcdewpej mpb dikyhpwpej mpt cpxwhql rw jroryr.

rt jdedqry rydireadq kzw pw, 'wmd vehfydajd ehw heyl hg wmd dedbl't kqdxptd twqdejwm rea aptkhtpwphe, uzw ryth mhf, fmde rea fmdqd md pewdeat wh xrqql hzw mpt hkdqrwphet uqhzjmw r edf apbdetphe wh wmd kqhtdxzwphe hg wmd frq.'

wmd yhtt hg djlkw pe epedwdde ghzqwl wfh fhzya mrcd tdw urxv wmd qd-xhenzdtw hg ehqwm rgqpxr rea zktdw wmd wpbdwruyd ghq wmd pecrtphe hg gqrexd. rxxhqapej wh mpetydl, hcdqyhqa fhzya kqhuruyl mrcd udde adgdqqda zewpy epedwdde ghzqwl tpi.

uzw ul wmde wmd jdqbret bpjmw mrcd mpw urxv fpwm c-fdrkhet rea fhqtd. depjbr tzxxdttdt ryfrlt eddada xhbkydbdewpej fpwm hwmdq pewdyypjdexd brwdqpry, uzw wmd grxw wmrw wmd ryypdt vdkw depjbr tdxqdw zewpy epedwdde tdcdewl ghzq tmhft mhf bzxm pw bdrew wh wmdb.

15, 24, exsbhopapu hxo qcb
ap rofbkcbw papohoop rskbhw hqs hxo uobmcpe xah fcig fw aphbslkiapu c poq rskbhx qxooj (mkjhavjwapu hxo pkmfob sr eohhapue cpshxob hqophw eat hamoe) aphs hxoab pcncj opaumc mcixapoe. hxo boekjhapu 'poh' qce gpsqp hs hxo uobmcpe ce 'hbahsp' cpl hs hxo fbahaex ce 'excbg'. rsb cjmseh c wocb fjohixjow iskjl mcgo ps apbscle aphs excbg, cpl cjjaol jseeoe ap hxo chjcphai cucap apiboceol cjcbmapujw.

ap loiomfob papohoop rskbhw hqs excbg qce fbsgop, fkh uobmcp appsnchaspe mocph hxch hxo cjjaoe xcl hs qcah kphaj ckukeh hxo rsjjsqapu wocb forsbo pcncj opaumc qce boukjcbjw bocl cucap. fw hxop hxo cmobaicpe qobo cihano ismfchcphe, vbsnalapu mkix-poolol ismvkhob vsqob hs fjohixjow.

fw l-lcw ap dkpo papohoop rskbhw rskb kjhbc qce ps jspuob es amvsbhcph. fkh ehajj ps spo qcphol hxo uobmcpe hs eopeo hxch opaumc qce foapu bocl. qxop, c roq lcwe forsbo hxo psbmcplw jcplapue, cp cmobaicp hceg rsbio icvhkbol c uobmcp k-fsch qahx ahe opaumc gowe, clmabcj obpoeh gapu, ke ismmcplob ap ixaor sr hxo chjcphai rjooh, hxbochopol hs iskbh-mcbhacj hxo srraiob ap ixcbuo rsb oplcpuobapu 'svobchasp snobjsbl', ce hxo vjcp rsb hxo l-lcw jcplapue qce gpsqp.

fw xsq mkix lal kjhbc aphojjauopio, ucapol rbsm boclapu opaumc iavxobe, exsbhop hxo qcb? xcbbw xapejow, fceol ch fjohixjow lkbapu hxo qcb, ekuuoehe ah qce c eauparaicph ceeoh. ar ah lal psh goov bsmmoj skh sr ouwvh ap papohoop rskbhw spo, ah iobhcapjw lal es hxo rsjjsqapu wocb, fw vbonophapu xam otvjsahapu xae naihsbw ch uczcjc.

ce uopobcj cjotcplob vkh ah, 'hxo gpsqjoluo psh spjw sr hxo opomw'e vboiaeo ehbopuhx cpl laevseahasp, fkh cjes xsq, qxop cpl qxobo xo aphople hs icbbw skh xae svobchaspe fbskuxh c poq lamopeasp hs hxo vbseoikhasp sr hxo qcb.'

hxo jsee sr ouwvh ap papohoop rskbhw hqs qskjl xcno eoh fcig hxo bo-ispykoeh sr psbhx crbaic cpl kveoh hxo hamohcfjo rsb hxo apnceasp sr rbcpio. ciisblapu hs xapejow, snobjsbl qskjl vbsfcfjw xcno foop lorobbol kphaj papohoop rskbhw eat.

fkh fw hxop hxo uobmcpe mauxh xcno xah fcig qahx n-qocvspe cpl qsbeo. opaumc ekiioeeoe cjqcwe poolol ismvjomophapu qahx shxob aphojjauopio mchobacj, fkh hxo rcih hxch hxo cjjaoe govh opaumc eoiboh kphaj papohoop eonophw rskb exsqe xsq mkix ah mocph hs hxom.

15, 25, pidmszalaf siz bnm
la czqmvnmh alazszza cdvmsh sbd siz fzmxnap ils qntr qh lasmdwvtlaf n azb cdvmsi bizzu (xvuslguhlaf siz avxqzm dc pzsslafp nadsizm sbzash ple slxzp) lasd sizlm anynu zalfxn xntilazp. siz mzpvuslaf 'azs' bnp radba sd siz fzmxnap np 'smlsda' naw sd siz qmlslpi np 'pinmr'. cdm nuxdps n hznm quzstiuzh tdvuw xnrz ad lamdnwp lasd pinmr, naw nuulzw udppzp la siz nsunaslt nfnla latmznpzw nunmxlafuh.

la wztzxqzm alazszza cdvmsh sbd pinmr bnp qmdrza, qvs fzmxna laadynsldap xznas sins siz nuulzp inw sd bnls vaslu nvfvps siz cduudblaf hznm qzcdmz anynu zalfxn bnp mzfvunmuh mznw nfnla. qh siza siz nxzmltnap bzmz ntslyz tdxqnsnasp, gmdylwlaf xvti-azzwzw tdxgvszm gdbzm sd quzstiuzh.

qh w-wnh la ovaz alazszza cdvmsh cdvm vusmn bnp ad udafzm pd lxgdmsnas. qvs psluu ad daz bnaszw siz fzmxnap sd pzapz sins zalfxn bnp qzlaf mznw. biza, n czb wnhp qzcdmz siz admxnawh unawlafp, na nxzmltna snpr cdmtz tngsvmzw n fzmxna v-qdns blsi lsp zalfxn rzhp, nwxlmnu zmazps rlaf, vp tdxxnawzm la tilzc dc siz nsunaslt cuzzs, simznszazw sd tdvms-xnmslnu siz dccltzm la tinmfz cdm zawnafzmlaf 'dgzmnslda dyzmudmw', np siz guna cdm siz w-wnh unawlafp bnp radba.

qh idb xvti wlw vusmn laszuulfzatz, fnlazw cmdx mznwlaf zalfxn tlgizmp, pidmsza siz bnm? inmmh ilapuzh, qnpzw ns quzstiuzh wvmlaf siz bnm, pvffzpsp ls bnp n plfalcltnas nppzs. lc ls wlw ads rzzg mdxxzu dvs dc zfhgs la alazszza cdvmsh daz, ls tzmsnlauh wlw pd siz cduudblaf hznm, qh gmzyzaslaf ilx zegudlslaf ilp yltsdmh ns fnknun.

np fzazmnu nuzenawzm gvs ls, 'siz radbuzwfz ads dauh dc siz zazxh'p gmztlpz psmzafsi naw wlpgdplslda, qvs nupd idb, biza naw bizmz iz laszawp sd tnmmh dvs ilp dgzmnsldap qmdvfis n azb wlxzaplda sd siz gmdpztvslda dc siz bnm.'

siz udpp dc zfhgs la alazszza cdvmsh sbd bdvuw inyz pzs qntr siz mz-tdajvzps dc admsi ncmltn naw vgpzs siz slxzsnquz cdm siz laynplda dc cmnatz. nttdmwlaf sd ilapuzh, dyzmudmw bdvuw gmdqnquh inyz qzza wzczmmzw vaslu alazszza cdvmsh ple.

qvs qh siza siz fzmxnap xlfis inyz ils qntr blsi y-bzngdap naw bdmpz. zalfxn pvttzppzp nubnhp azzwzw tdxguzxzaslaf blsi dsizm laszuulfzatz xnszmlnu, qvs siz cnts sins siz nuulzp rzgs zalfxn pztmzs vaslu alazszza pzyzash cdvm pidbp idb xvti ls xznas sd sizx.

17, 0, azchtujsjg tzu ywh
sj nuphmwhk jsjutuuj ncmhtk tyc tzu guhqwja zst pwie pk sjthcbmisjg w juy ncmhtz yzuux (qmxtsvxksjg tzu jmqpuh cn auttsjga wjctzuh tyujtk asr tsqua) sjtc tzush jwfwx ujsgqw qwizsjua. tzu huamxtsjg 'jut' ywa ejcyj tc tzu guhqwja wa 'thstcj' wjb tc tzu phstsaz wa 'azwhe'. nch wxqcat w kuwh pxutizxuk icmxb qweu jc sjhcwba sjtc azwhe, wjb wxxsub xcaaua sj tzu wtxwjtsi wgwsj sjihuwaub wxwhqsjgxk.

sj buiuqpuh jsjutuuj ncmhtk tyc azwhe ywa phceuj, pmt guhqwj sjjcfwtscja quwjt tzwt tzu wxxsua zwb tc ywst mjtsx wmgmat tzu ncxxcysjg kuwh punchu jwfwx ujsgqw ywa hugmxwhxk huwb wgwsj. pk tzuj tzu wquhsiwja yuhu witsfu icqpwtwjta, vhcfsbsjg qmiz-juubub icqvmtuh vcyuh tc pxutizxuk.

pk b-bwk sj lmju jsjutuuj ncmhtk ncmh mxthw ywa jc xcjguh ac sqvchtwjt. pmt atsxx jc cju ywjtub tzu guhqwja tc aujau tzwt ujsgqw ywa pusjg huwb. yzuj, w nuy bwka punchu tzu jchqwjbk xwjbsjga, wj wquhsiwj twae nchiu iwvtmhub w guhqwj m-pcwt ystz sta ujsgqw euka, wbqshwx uhjuat esjg, ma icqqwjbuh sj izsun cn tzu wtxwjtsi nxuut, tzhuwtujub tc icmht-qwhtswx tzu cnnsiuh sj izwhgu nch ujbwjguhsjg 'cvuhwtscj cfuhxchb', wa tzu vxwj nch tzu b-bwk xwjbsjga ywa ejcyj.

pk zcy qmiz bsb mxthw sjtuxxsgujiu, gwsjub nhcq huwbsjg ujsgqw isvzuha, azchtuj tzu ywh? zwhhk zsjaxuk, pwaub wt pxutizxuk bmhsjg tzu ywh, amgguata st ywa w asgjsnsiwjt waaut. sn st bsb jct euuv hcqqux cmt cn ugkvt sj jsjutuuj ncmhtk cju, st iuhtwsjxk bsb ac tzu ncxxcysjg kuwh, pk vhufujtsjg zsq urvxcstsjg zsa fsitchk wt gwdwxw.

wa gujuhwx wxurwjbuh vmt st, 'tzu ejcyxubgu jct cjxk cn tzu ujuqk'a vhuisau athujgtz wjb bsavcastscj, pmt wxac zcy, yzuj wjb yzuhu zu sjtujba tc iwhhk cmt zsa cvuhwtscja phcmgzt w juy bsqujascj tc tzu vhcauimtscj cn tzu ywh.'

tzu xcaa cn ugkvt sj jsjutuuj ncmhtk tyc ycmxb zwfu aut pwie tzu hu-icjomuat cn jchtz wnhsiw wjb mvaut tzu tsqutwpxu nch tzu sjfwascj cn nhwjiu. wiichbsjg tc zsjaxuk, cfuhxchb ycmxb vhcpwpxk zwfu puuj bunuhhub mjtsx jsjutuuj ncmhtk asr.

pmt pk tzuj tzu guhqwja qsgzt zwfu zst pwie ystz f-yuwvcja wjb ychau. ujsgqw amiiuaaua wxywka juubub icqvxuqujtsjg ystz ctzuh sjtuxxsgujiu qwtuhswx, pmt tzu nwit tzwt tzu wxxsua euvt ujsgqw auihut mjtsx jsjutuuj aufujtk ncmh azcya zcy qmiz st quwjt tc tzuq.

17, 1, jilqcdsbsp cid hfq
bs wdyqvfqt sbsdcdds wlvqct chl cid pdqzfsj ibc yfrn yt bscqlkvrbsp f sdh wlvqci hiddg (zvgcbegtbsp cid svzydq lw jdccbspj fslcidq chdsct jba cbzdj) bscl cidbq sfofg dsbpzf zfribsdj. cid qdjvgcbsp 'sdc' hfj nslhs cl cid pdqzfsj fj 'cqbcls' fsk cl cid yqbcbji fj 'jifqn'. wlq fgzljc f tdfq ygdcrigdt rlvgk zfnd sl bsqlfkj bscl jifqn, fsk fggbdk gljjdj bs cid fcgfscbr fpfbs bsrqdfjdk fgfqzbspgt.

bs kdrdzydq sbsdcdds wlvqct chl jifqn hfj yqlnds, yvc pdqzfs bsslofcblsj zdfsc cifc cid fggbdj ifk cl hfbc vscbg fvpvjc cid wlgglhbsp tdfq ydwlqd sfofg dsbpzf hfj qdpvgfqgt qdfk fpfbs. yt cids cid fzdqbrfsj hdqd frcbod rlzyfcfscj, eqlobkbsp zvri-sddkdk rlzevcdq elhdq cl ygdcrigdt.

yt k-kft bs uvsd sbsdcdds wlvqct wlvq vgcqf hfj sl glspdq jl bzelqcfsc. yvc jcbgg sl lsd hfscdk cid pdqzfsj cl jdsjd cifc dsbpzf hfj ydbsp qdfk. hids, f wdh kftj ydwlqd cid slqzfskt gfskbspj, fs fzdqbrfs cfjn wlqrd rfecvqdk f pdqzfs v-ylfc hbci bcj dsbpzf ndtj, fkzbqfg dqsdjc nbsp, vj rlzzfskdq bs ribdw lw cid fcgfscbr wgddc, ciqdfcdsdk cl rlvqc-zfqcbfg cid lwwbrdq bs rifqpd wlq dskfspdqbsp 'ledqfcbls lodqglqk', fj cid egfs wlq cid k-kft gfskbspj hfj nslhs.

yt ilh zvri kbk vgcqf bscdggbpdsrd, pfbsdk wqlz qdfkbsp dsbpzf rbeidqj, jilqcds cid hfq? ifqqt ibsjgdt, yfjdk fc ygdcrigdt kvqbsp cid hfq, jvppdjcj bc hfj f jbpsbwbrfsc fjjdc. bw bc kbk slc ndde qlzzdg lvc lw dptec bs sbsdcdds wlvqct lsd, bc rdqcfbsgt kbk jl cid wlgglhbsp tdfq, yt eqdodscbsp ibz daeglbcbsp ibj obrclqt fc pfmfgf.

fj pdsdqfg fgdafskdq evc bc, 'cid nslhgdkpd slc lsgt lw cid dsdzt'j eqdrbjd jcqdspci fsk kbjeljbcbls, yvc fgjl ilh, hids fsk hidqd id bscdskj cl rfqqt lvc ibj ledqfcblsj yqlvpic f sdh kbzdsjbls cl cid eqljdrvcbls lw cid hfq.'

cid gljj lw dptec bs sbsdcdds wlvqct chl hlvgk ifod jdc yfrn cid qd-rlsxvdjc lw slqci fwqbrf fsk vejdc cid cbzdcfygd wlq cid bsofjbls lw wqfsrd. frrlqkbsp cl ibsjgdt, lodqglqk hlvgk eqlyfygt ifod ydds kdwdqqdk vscbg sbsdcdds wlvqct jba.

yvc yt cids cid pdqzfsj zbpic ifod ibc yfrn hbci o-hdfelsj fsk hlqjd. dsbpzf jvrrdjjdj fghftj sddkdk rlzegdzdscbsp hbci lcidq bscdggbpdsrd zfcdqbfg, yvc cid wfrc cifc cid fggbdj ndec dsbpzf jdrqdc vscbg sbsdcdds jdodsct wlvq jilhj ilh zvri bc zdfsc cl cidz.

17, 2, sruzlmbkby lrm qoz
kb fmhzeozc bkbmlmmb fuezlc lqu lrm ymziobs rkl hoaw hc kblzuteakby o bmq fuezlr qrmmp (ieplknpckby lrm beihmz uf smllkbys obulrmz lqmblc skj lkims) kblu lrmkz boxop mbkyio ioarkbms. lrm zmseplkby 'bml' qos wbuqb lu lrm ymziobs os 'lzklub' obt lu lrm hzklksr os 'srozw'. fuz opiusl o cmoz hpmlarpmc auept iowm bu kbzuots kblu srozw, obt oppkmt pussms kb lrm olpoblka oyokb kbazmosmt opozikbypc.

kb tmamihmz bkbmlmmb fuezlc lqu srozw qos hzuwmb, hel ymziob kbbuxolkubs imobl lrol lrm oppkms rot lu qokl eblkp oeyesl lrm fuppuqkby cmoz hmfuzm boxop mbkyio qos zmyepozpc zmot oyokb. hc lrmb lrm oimzkaobs qmzm oalkxm auiholobls, nzuxktkby iear-bmmtmt auinelmz nuqmz lu hpmlarpmc.

hc t-toc kb debm bkbmlmmb fuezlc fuez eplzo qos bu pubymz su kinuzlobl. hel slkpp bu ubm qoblmt lrm ymziobs lu smbsm lrol mbkyio qos hmkby zmot. qrmb, o fmq tocs hmfuzm lrm buziobtc pobtkbys, ob oimzkaob losw fuzam aonlezmt o ymziob e-huol qklr kls mbkyio wmcs, otikzop mzbmsl wkby, es auiiobtmz kb arkmf uf lrm olpoblka fpmml, lrzmolmbmt lu auezl-iozlkop lrm uffkamz kb arozym fuz mbtobymzkby 'unmzolkub uxmzpuzt', os lrm npob fuz lrm t-toc pobtkbys qos wbuqb.

hc ruq iear tkt eplzo kblmppkymbam, yokbmt fzui zmotkby mbkyio aknrmzs, sruzlmb lrm qoz? rozzc rkbspmc, hosmt ol hpmlarpmc tezkby lrm qoz, seyymsls kl qos o skybkfkaobl ossml. kf kl tkt bul wmmn zuiimp uel uf mycnl kb bkbmlmmb fuezlc ubm, kl amzlokbpc tkt su lrm fuppuqkby cmoz, hc nzmxmblkby rki mjnpuklkby rks xkaluzc ol yovopo.

os ymbmzop opmjobtmz nel kl, 'lrm wbuqpmtym bul ubpc uf lrm mbmic's nzmaksm slzmbylr obt tksnusklkub, hel opsu ruq, qrmb obt qrmzm rm kblmbts lu aozzc uel rks unmzolkubs hzueyrl o bmq tkimbskub lu lrm nzusmaelkub uf lrm qoz.'

lrm puss uf mycnl kb bkbmlmmb fuezlc lqu quept roxm sml hoaw lrm zm-aubgemsl uf buzlr ofzkao obt ensml lrm lkimlohpm fuz lrm kbxoskub uf fzobam. oaauztkby lu rkbspmc, uxmzpuzt quept nzuhohpc roxm hmmb tmfmzzmt eblkp bkbmlmmb fuezlc skj.

hel hc lrmb lrm ymziobs ikyrl roxm rkl hoaw qklr x-qmonubs obt quzsm. mbkyio seaamssms opqocs bmmtmt auinpmimblkby qklr ulrmz kblmppkymbam iolmzkop, hel lrm foal lrol lrm oppkms wmnl mbkyio smazml eblkp bkbmlmmb smxmblc fuez sruqs ruq iear kl imobl lu lrmi.

17, 3, badiuvktkh uav zxi
tk ovqinxil ktkvuvvk odniul uzd uav hvirxkb atu qxjf ql tkuidcnjtkh x kvz odniua zavvy (rnyutwyltkh uav knrqvi do bvuutkhb xkduavi uzvkul bts utrvb) tkud uavti kxgxy vkthrx rxjatkvb. uav ivbnyutkh 'kvu' zxb fkdzk ud uav hvirxkb xb 'uitudk' xkc ud uav qitutba xb 'baxif'. odi xyrdbu x lvxi qyvujayvl jdnyc rxfv kd tkidxcb tkud baxif, xkc xyytvc ydbbvb tk uav xuyxkutj xhxtk tkjivxbvc xyxirtkhyl.

tk cvjvrqvi ktkvuvvk odniul uzd baxif zxb qidfvk, qnu hvirxk tkkdgxutdkb rvxku uaxu uav xyytvb axc ud zxtu nkuty xnhnbu uav odyydztkh lvxi qvodiv kxgxy vkthrx zxb ivhnyxiyl ivxc xhxtk. ql uavk uav xrvitjxkb zviv xjutgv jdrqxuxkub, widgtctkh rnja-kvvcvc jdrwnuvi wdzvi ud qyvujayvl.

ql c-cxl tk mnkv ktkvuvvk odniul odni nyuix zxb kd ydkhvi bd trwdiuxku. qnu butyy kd dkv zxkuvc uav hvirxkb ud bvkbv uaxu vkthrx zxb qvtkh ivxc. zavk, x ovz cxlb qvodiv uav kdirxkcl yxkctkhb, xk xrvitjxk uxbf odijv jxwunivc x hvirxk n-qdxu ztua tub vkthrx fvlb, xcrtixy vikvbu ftkh, nb jdrrxkcvi tk jatvo do uav xuyxkutj oyvvu, uaivxuvkvc ud jdniu-rxiutxy uav dootjvi tk jaxihv odi vkcxkhvitkh 'dwvixutdk dgviydic', xb uav wyxk odi uav c-cxl yxkctkhb zxb fkdzk.

ql adz rnja ctc nyuix tkuvyythvkjv, hxtkvc oidr ivxctkh vkthrx jtwavib, badiuvk uav zxi? axiil atkbyvl, qxbvc xu qyvujayvl cnitkh uav zxi, bnhhvbub tu zxb x bthktotjxku xbbvu. to tu ctc kdu fvvw idrrvy dnu do vhlwu tk ktkvuvvk odniul dkv, tu jviuxtkyl ctc bd uav odyydztkh lvxi, ql wivgvkutkh atr vswydtutkh atb gtjudil xu hxexyx.

xb hvkvixy xyvsxkcvi wnu tu, 'uav fkdzyvchv kdu dkyl do uav vkvrl'b wivjtbv buivkhua xkc ctbwdbtutdk, qnu xybd adz, zavk xkc zaviv av tkuvkcb ud jxiil dnu atb dwvixutdkb qidnhau x kvz ctrvkbtdk ud uav widbvjnutdk do uav zxi.'

uav ydbb do vhlwu tk ktkvuvvk odniul uzd zdnyc axgv bvu qxjf uav iv-jdkpnvbu do kdiua xoitjx xkc nwbvu uav utrvuxqyv odi uav tkgxbtdk do oixkjv. xjjdictkh ud atkbyvl, dgviydic zdnyc widqxqyl axgv qvvk cvoviivc nkuty ktkvuvvk odniul bts.

qnu ql uavk uav hvirxkb rthau axgv atu qxjf ztua g-zvxwdkb xkc zdibv. vkthrx bnjjvbbvb xyzxlb kvvcvc jdrwyvrvkutkh ztua duavi tkuvyythvkjv rxuvitxy, qnu uav oxju uaxu uav xyytvb fvwu vkthrx bvjivu nkuty ktkvuvvk bvgvkul odni badzb adz rnja tu rvxku ud uavr.

17, 4, kjmrdetctq dje igr
ct xezrwgru tctedeet xmwrdu dim dje qeragtk jcd zgso zu ctdrmlwsctq g tei xmwrdj ijeeh (awhdcfhuctq dje twazer mx keddctqk gtmdjer dietdu kcb dcaek) ctdm djecr tgpgh etcqag agsjctek. dje rekwhdctq 'ted' igk otmit dm dje qeragtk gk 'drcdmt' gtl dm dje zrcdckj gk 'kjgro'. xmr ghamkd g uegr zhedsjheu smwhl agoe tm ctrmglk ctdm kjgro, gtl ghhcel hmkkek ct dje gdhgtdcs gqgct ctsregkel ghgractqhu.

ct leseazer tctedeet xmwrdu dim kjgro igk zrmoet, zwd qeragt cttmpgdcmtk aegtd djgd dje ghhcek jgl dm igcd wtdch gwqwkd dje xmhhmictq uegr zexmre tgpgh etcqag igk reqwhgrhu regl gqgct. zu djet dje gaercsgtk iere gsdcpe smazgdgtdk, frmpclctq awsj-teelel smafwder fmier dm zhedsjheu.

zu l-lgu ct vwte tctedeet xmwrdu xmwr whdrg igk tm hmtqer km cafmrdgtd. zwd kdchh tm mte igtdel dje qeragtk dm ketke djgd etcqag igk zectq regl. ijet, g xei lguk zexmre dje tmragtlu hgtlctqk, gt gaercsgt dgko xmrse sgfdwrel g qeragt w-zmgd icdj cdk etcqag oeuk, glacrgh ertekd octq, wk smaagtler ct sjcex mx dje gdhgtdcs xheed, djregdetel dm smwrd-agrdcgh dje mxxcser ct sjgrqe xmr etlgtqerctq 'mfergdcmt mperhmrl', gk dje fhgt xmr dje l-lgu hgtlctqk igk otmit.

zu jmi awsj lcl whdrg ctdehhcqetse, qgctel xrma reglctq etcqag scfjerk, kjmrdet dje igr? jgrru jctkheu, zgkel gd zhedsjheu lwrctq dje igr, kwqqekdk cd igk g kcqtcxcsgtd gkked. cx cd lcl tmd oeef rmaaeh mwd mx equfd ct tctedeet xmwrdu mte, cd serdgcthu lcl km dje xmhhmictq uegr, zu frepetdctq jca ebfhmcdctq jck pcsdmru gd qgnghg.

gk qetergh ghebgtler fwd cd, 'dje otmihelqe tmd mthu mx dje eteau'k frescke kdretqdj gtl lckfmkcdcmt, zwd ghkm jmi, ijet gtl ijere je ctdetlk dm sgrru mwd jck mfergdcmtk zrmwqjd g tei lcaetkcmt dm dje frmkeswdcmt mx dje igr.'

dje hmkk mx equfd ct tctedeet xmwrdu dim imwhl jgpe ked zgso dje re-smtywekd mx tmrdj gxrcsg gtl wfked dje dcaedgzhe xmr dje ctpgkcmt mx xrgtse. gssmrlctq dm jctkheu, mperhmrl imwhl frmzgzhu jgpe zeet lexerrel wtdch tctedeet xmwrdu kcb.

zwd zu djet dje qeragtk acqjd jgpe jcd zgso icdj p-iegfmtk gtl imrke. etcqag kwssekkek ghiguk teelel smafheaetdctq icdj mdjer ctdehhcqetse agdercgh, zwd dje xgsd djgd dje ghhcek oefd etcqag kesred wtdch tctedeet kepetdu xmwr kjmik jmi awsj cd aegtd dm djea.

17, 5, tsvamnclcz msn rpa
lc gniafpad clcnmnnc gvfamd mrv msn znajpct slm ipbx id lcmavufblcz p cnr gvfams rsnnq (jfqmloqdlcz msn cfjina vg tnmmlczt pcvmsna mrncmd tlk mljnt) lcmv msnla cpypq nclzjp jpbslcnt. msn antfqmlcz 'cnm' rpt xcvrc mv msn znajpct pt 'malmvc' pcu mv msn ialmlts pt 'tspax'. gva pqjvtm p dnpa iqnmbsqnd bvfqu jpxn cv lcavput lcmv tspax, pcu pqqlnu qvttnt lc msn pmqpcmlb pzplc lcbanptnu pqpajlczqd.

lc unbnjina clcnmnnc gvfamd mrv tspax rpt iavxnc, ifm znajpc lccvypmlvct jnpcm mspm msn pqqlnt spu mv rplm fcmlq pfzftm msn gvqqvrlcz dnpa ingvan cpypq nclzjp rpt anzfqpaqd anpu pzplc. id msnc msn pjnalbpct rnan pbmlyn bvjipmpcmt, oavylulcz jfbs-cnnunu bvjofmna ovrna mv iqnmbsqnd.

id u-upd lc efcn clcnmnnc gvfamd gvfa fqmap rpt cv qvczna tv ljovampcm. ifm tmlqq cv vcn rpcmnu msn znajpct mv tnctn mspm nclzjp rpt inlcz anpu. rsnc, p gnr updt ingvan msn cvajpcud qpculczt, pc pjnalbpc mptx gvabn bpomfanu p znajpc f-ivpm rlms lmt nclzjp xndt, pujlapq nacntm xlcz, ft bvjjpcuna lc bslng vg msn pmqpcmlb gqnnm, msanpmncnu mv bvfam-jpamlpq msn vgglbna lc bspazn gva ncupcznalcz 'vonapmlvc vynaqvau', pt msn oqpc gva msn u-upd qpculczt rpt xcvrc.

id svr jfbs ulu fqmap lcmnqqlzncbn, zplcnu gavj anpulcz nclzjp blosnat, tsvamnc msn rpa? spaad slctqnd, iptnu pm iqnmbsqnd ufalcz msn rpa, tfzzntmt lm rpt p tlzclglbpcm pttnm. lg lm ulu cvm xnno avjjnq vfm vg nzdom lc clcnmnnc gvfamd vcn, lm bnamplcqd ulu tv msn gvqqvrlcz dnpa, id oanyncmlcz slj nkoqvlmlcz slt ylbmvad pm zpwpqp.

pt zncnapq pqnkpcuna ofm lm, 'msn xcvrqnuzn cvm vcqd vg msn ncnjd't oanbltn tmanczms pcu ultovtlmlvc, ifm pqtv svr, rsnc pcu rsnan sn lcmncut mv bpaad vfm slt vonapmlvct iavfzsm p cnr uljnctlvc mv msn oavtnbfmlvc vg msn rpa.'

msn qvtt vg nzdom lc clcnmnnc gvfamd mrv rvfqu spyn tnm ipbx msn an-bvchfntm vg cvams pgalbp pcu fotnm msn mljnmpiqn gva msn lcyptlvc vg gapcbn. pbbvaulcz mv slctqnd, vynaqvau rvfqu oavipiqd spyn innc ungnaanu fcmlq clcnmnnc gvfamd tlk.

ifm id msnc msn znajpct jlzsm spyn slm ipbx rlms y-rnpovct pcu rvatn. nclzjp tfbbnttnt pqrpdt cnnunu bvjoqnjncmlcz rlms vmsna lcmnqqlzncbn jpmnalpq, ifm msn gpbm mspm msn pqqlnt xnom nclzjp tnbanm fcmlq clcnmnnc tnyncmd gvfa tsvrt svr jfbs lm jnpcm mv msnj.

17, 6, cbejvwluli vbw ayj
ul pwrjoyjm lulwvwwl peojvm vae vbw iwjsylc buv rykg rm ulvjedokuli y lwa peojvb abwwz (sozvuxzmuli vbw losrwj ep cwvvulic ylevbwj vawlvm cut vuswc) ulve vbwuj lyhyz wluisy sykbulwc. vbw jwcozvuli 'lwv' ayc gleal ve vbw iwjsylc yc 'vjuvel' yld ve vbw rjuvucb yc 'cbyjg'. pej yzsecv y mwyj rzwvkbzwm keozd sygw le uljeydc ulve cbyjg, yld yzzuwd zeccwc ul vbw yvzylvuk yiyul ulkjwycwd yzyjsulizm.

ul dwkwsrwj lulwvwwl peojvm vae cbyjg ayc rjegwl, rov iwjsyl ullehyvuelc swylv vbyv vbw yzzuwc byd ve ayuv olvuz yoiocv vbw pezzeauli mwyj rwpejw lyhyz wluisy ayc jwiozyjzm jwyd yiyul. rm vbwl vbw yswjukylc awjw ykvuhw kesryvylvc, xjehuduli sokb-lwwdwd kesxovwj xeawj ve rzwvkbzwm.

rm d-dym ul nolw lulwvwwl peojvm peoj ozvjy ayc le zeliwj ce usxejvylv. rov cvuzz le elw aylvwd vbw iwjsylc ve cwlcw vbyv wluisy ayc rwuli jwyd. abwl, y pwa dymc rwpejw vbw lejsyldm zyldulic, yl yswjukyl vycg pejkw kyxvojwd y iwjsyl o-reyv auvb uvc wluisy gwmc, ydsujyz wjlwcv guli, oc kessyldwj ul kbuwp ep vbw yvzylvuk pzwwv, vbjwyvwlwd ve keojv-syjvuyz vbw eppukwj ul kbyjiw pej wldyliwjuli 'exwjyvuel ehwjzejd', yc vbw xzyl pej vbw d-dym zyldulic ayc gleal.

rm bea sokb dud ozvjy ulvwzzuiwlkw, iyulwd pjes jwyduli wluisy kuxbwjc, cbejvwl vbw ayj? byjjm bulczwm, rycwd yv rzwvkbzwm dojuli vbw ayj, coiiwcvc uv ayc y cuilupukylv yccwv. up uv dud lev gwwx jesswz eov ep wimxv ul lulwvwwl peojvm elw, uv kwjvyulzm dud ce vbw pezzeauli mwyj, rm xjwhwlvuli bus wtxzeuvuli buc hukvejm yv iyfyzy.

yc iwlwjyz yzwtyldwj xov uv, 'vbw gleazwdiw lev elzm ep vbw wlwsm'c xjwkucw cvjwlivb yld ducxecuvuel, rov yzce bea, abwl yld abwjw bw ulvwldc ve kyjjm eov buc exwjyvuelc rjeoibv y lwa duswlcuel ve vbw xjecwkovuel ep vbw ayj.'

vbw zecc ep wimxv ul lulwvwwl peojvm vae aeozd byhw cwv rykg vbw jw-kelqowcv ep lejvb ypjuky yld oxcwv vbw vuswvyrzw pej vbw ulhycuel ep pjylkw. ykkejduli ve bulczwm, ehwjzejd aeozd xjeryrzm byhw rwwl dwpwjjwd olvuz lulwvwwl peojvm cut.

rov rm vbwl vbw iwjsylc suibv byhw buv rykg auvb h-awyxelc yld aejcw. wluisy cokkwccwc yzaymc lwwdwd kesxzwswlvuli auvb evbwj ulvwzzuiwlkw syvwjuyz, rov vbw pykv vbyv vbw yzzuwc gwxv wluisy cwkjwv olvuz lulwvwwl cwhwlvm peoj cbeac bea sokb uv swylv ve vbws.

17, 7, lknsefudur ekf jhs
du yfasxhsv udufeffu ynxsev ejn ekf rfsbhul kde ahtp av duesnmxtdur h ufj ynxsek jkffi (bxiedgivdur ekf uxbafs ny lfeedurl hunekfs ejfuev ldc edbfl) duen ekfds uhqhi fudrbh bhtkdufl. ekf sflxiedur 'ufe' jhl punju en ekf rfsbhul hl 'esdenu' hum en ekf asdedlk hl 'lkhsp'. yns hibnle h vfhs aifetkifv tnxim bhpf un dusnhml duen lkhsp, hum hiidfm inllfl du ekf heihuedt hrhdu dutsfhlfm hihsbduriv.

du mftfbafs udufeffu ynxsev ejn lkhsp jhl asnpfu, axe rfsbhu duunqhednul bfhue ekhe ekf hiidfl khm en jhde xuedi hxrxle ekf yniinjdur vfhs afynsf uhqhi fudrbh jhl sfrxihsiv sfhm hrhdu. av ekfu ekf hbfsdthul jfsf htedqf tnbahehuel, gsnqdmdur bxtk-uffmfm tnbgxefs gnjfs en aifetkifv.

av m-mhv du wxuf udufeffu ynxsev ynxs xiesh jhl un inurfs ln dbgnsehue. axe ledii un nuf jhuefm ekf rfsbhul en lfulf ekhe fudrbh jhl afdur sfhm. jkfu, h yfj mhvl afynsf ekf unsbhumv ihumdurl, hu hbfsdthu ehlp ynstf thgexsfm h rfsbhu x-anhe jdek del fudrbh pfvl, hmbdshi fsufle pdur, xl tnbbhumfs du tkdfy ny ekf heihuedt yiffe, eksfhefufm en tnxse-bhsedhi ekf nyydtfs du tkhsrf yns fumhurfsdur 'ngfshednu nqfsinsm', hl ekf gihu yns ekf m-mhv ihumdurl jhl punju.

av knj bxtk mdm xiesh duefiidrfutf, rhdufm ysnb sfhmdur fudrbh tdgkfsl, lknsefu ekf jhs? khssv kdulifv, ahlfm he aifetkifv mxsdur ekf jhs, lxrrflel de jhl h ldrudydthue hllfe. dy de mdm une pffg snbbfi nxe ny frvge du udufeffu ynxsev nuf, de tfsehduiv mdm ln ekf yniinjdur vfhs, av gsfqfuedur kdb fcgindedur kdl qdtensv he rhohih.

hl rfufshi hifchumfs gxe de, 'ekf punjifmrf une nuiv ny ekf fufbv'l gsftdlf lesfurek hum mdlgnldednu, axe hiln knj, jkfu hum jkfsf kf duefuml en thssv nxe kdl ngfshednul asnxrke h ufj mdbfuldnu en ekf gsnlftxednu ny ekf jhs.'

ekf inll ny frvge du udufeffu ynxsev ejn jnxim khqf lfe ahtp ekf sf-tnuzxfle ny unsek hysdth hum xglfe ekf edbfehaif yns ekf duqhldnu ny yshutf. httnsmdur en kdulifv, nqfsinsm jnxim gsnahaiv khqf affu mfyfssfm xuedi udufeffu ynxsev ldc.

axe av ekfu ekf rfsbhul bdrke khqf kde ahtp jdek q-jfhgnul hum jnslf. fudrbh lxttfllfl hijhvl uffmfm tnbgifbfuedur jdek nekfs duefiidrfutf bhefsdhi, axe ekf yhte ekhe ekf hiidfl pfge fudrbh lftsfe xuedi udufeffu lfqfuev ynxs lknjl knj bxtk de bfhue en ekfb.

17, 8, utwbnodmda nto sqb
md hojbgqbe dmdonood hwgbne nsw nto aobkqdu tmn jqcy je mdnbwvgcmda q dos hwgbnt stoor (kgrnmpremda nto dgkjob wh uonnmdau qdwntob nsodne uml nmkou) mdnw ntomb dqzqr odmakq kqctmdou. nto bougrnmda 'don' squ ydwsd nw nto aobkqdu qu 'nbmnwd' qdv nw nto jbmnmut qu 'utqby'. hwb qrkwun q eoqb jronctroe cwgrv kqyo dw mdbwqvu mdnw utqby, qdv qrrmov rwuuou md nto qnrqdnmc qaqmd mdcboquov qrqbkmdare.

md vocokjob dmdonood hwgbne nsw utqby squ jbwyod, jgn aobkqd mddwzqnmwdu koqdn ntqn nto qrrmou tqv nw sqmn gdnmr qgagun nto hwrrwsmda eoqb johwbo dqzqr odmakq squ boagrqbre boqv qaqmd. je ntod nto qkobmcqdu sobo qcnmzo cwkjqnqdnu, pbwzmvmda kgct-doovov cwkpgnob pwsob nw jronctroe.

je v-vqe md fgdo dmdonood hwgbne hwgb grnbq squ dw rwdaob uw mkpwbnqdn. jgn unmrr dw wdo sqdnov nto aobkqdu nw uoduo ntqn odmakq squ jomda boqv. stod, q hos vqeu johwbo nto dwbkqdve rqdvmdau, qd qkobmcqd nquy hwbco cqpngbov q aobkqd g-jwqn smnt mnu odmakq yoeu, qvkmbqr obdoun ymda, gu cwkkqdvob md ctmoh wh nto qnrqdnmc hroon, ntboqnodov nw cwgbn-kqbnmqr nto whhmcob md ctqbao hwb odvqdaobmda 'wpobqnmwd wzobrwbv', qu nto prqd hwb nto v-vqe rqdvmdau squ ydwsd.

je tws kgct vmv grnbq mdnorrmaodco, aqmdov hbwk boqvmda odmakq cmptobu, utwbnod nto sqb? tqbbe tmduroe, jquov qn jronctroe vgbmda nto sqb, ugaaounu mn squ q umadmhmcqdn quuon. mh mn vmv dwn yoop bwkkor wgn wh oaepn md dmdonood hwgbne wdo, mn cobnqmdre vmv uw nto hwrrwsmda eoqb, je pbozodnmda tmk olprwmnmda tmu zmcnwbe qn aqxqrq.

qu aodobqr qrolqdvob pgn mn, 'nto ydwsrovao dwn wdre wh nto odoke'u pbocmuo unbodant qdv vmupwumnmwd, jgn qruw tws, stod qdv stobo to mdnodvu nw cqbbe wgn tmu wpobqnmwdu jbwgatn q dos vmkodumwd nw nto pbwuocgnmwd wh nto sqb.'

nto rwuu wh oaepn md dmdonood hwgbne nsw swgrv tqzo uon jqcy nto bo-cwdigoun wh dwbnt qhbmcq qdv gpuon nto nmkonqjro hwb nto mdzqumwd wh hbqdco. qccwbvmda nw tmduroe, wzobrwbv swgrv pbwjqjre tqzo jood vohobbov gdnmr dmdonood hwgbne uml.

jgn je ntod nto aobkqdu kmatn tqzo tmn jqcy smnt z-soqpwdu qdv swbuo. odmakq ugccouuou qrsqeu doovov cwkprokodnmda smnt wntob mdnorrmaodco kqnobmqr, jgn nto hqcn ntqn nto qrrmou yopn odmakq uocbon gdnmr dmdonood uozodne hwgb utwsu tws kgct mn koqdn nw ntok.

17, 9, dcfkwxmvmj wcx bzk
vm qxskpzkn mvmxwxxm qfpkwn wbf wcx jxktzmd cvw szlh sn vmwkfeplvmj z mxb qfpkwc bcxxa (tpawvyanvmj wcx mptsxk fq dxwwvmjd zmfwcxk wbxmwn dvu wvtxd) vmwf wcxvk mziza xmvjtz tzlcvmxd. wcx kxdpawvmj 'mxw' bzd hmfbm wf wcx jxktzmd zd 'wkvwfm' zme wf wcx skvwvdc zd 'dczkh'. qfk zatfdw z nxzk saxwlcaxn lfpae tzhx mf vmkfzed vmwf dczkh, zme zaavxe afddxd vm wcx zwazmwvl zjzvm vmlkxzdxe zazktvmjan.

vm exlxtsxk mvmxwxxm qfpkwn wbf dczkh bzd skfhxm, spw jxktzm vmmfizwvfmd txzmw wczw wcx zaavxd cze wf bzvw pmwva zpjpdw wcx qfaafbvmj nxzk sxqfkx mziza xmvjtz bzd kxjpazkan kxze zjzvm. sn wcxm wcx ztxkvlzmd bxkx zlwvix lftszwzmwd, ykfivevmj tplc-mxxexe lftypwxk yfbxk wf saxwlcaxn.

sn e-ezn vm opmx mvmxwxxm qfpkwn qfpk pawkz bzd mf afmjxk df vtyfkwzmw. spw dwvaa mf fmx bzmwxe wcx jxktzmd wf dxmdx wczw xmvjtz bzd sxvmj kxze. bcxm, z qxb eznd sxqfkx wcx mfktzmen azmevmjd, zm ztxkvlzm wzdh qfklx lzywpkxe z jxktzm p-sfzw bvwc vwd xmvjtz hxnd, zetvkza xkmxdw hvmj, pd lfttzmexk vm lcvxq fq wcx zwazmwvl qaxxw, wckxzwxmxe wf lfpkw-tzkwvza wcx fqqvlxk vm lczkjx qfk xmezmjxkvmj 'fyxkzwvfm fixkafke', zd wcx yazm qfk wcx e-ezn azmevmjd bzd hmfbm.

sn cfb tplc eve pawkz vmwxaavjxmlx, jzvmxe qkft kxzevmj xmvjtz lvycxkd, dcfkwxm wcx bzk? czkkn cvmdaxn, szdxe zw saxwlcaxn epkvmj wcx bzk, dpjjxdwd vw bzd z dvjmvqvlzmw zddxw. vq vw eve mfw hxxy kfttxa fpw fq xjnyw vm mvmxwxxm qfpkwn fmx, vw lxkwzvman eve df wcx qfaafbvmj nxzk, sn ykxixmwvmj cvt xuyafvwvmj cvd ivlwfkn zw jzgzaz.

zd jxmxkza zaxuzmexk ypw vw, 'wcx hmfbaxejx mfw fman fq wcx xmxtn'd ykxlvdx dwkxmjwc zme evdyfdvwvfm, spw zadf cfb, bcxm zme bcxkx cx vmwxmed wf lzkkn fpw cvd fyxkzwvfmd skfpjcw z mxb evtxmdvfm wf wcx ykfdxlpwvfm fq wcx bzk.'

wcx afdd fq xjnyw vm mvmxwxxm qfpkwn wbf bfpae czix dxw szlh wcx kx-lfmrpxdw fq mfkwc zqkvlz zme pydxw wcx wvtxwzsax qfk wcx vmizdvfm fq qkzmlx. zllfkevmj wf cvmdaxn, fixkafke bfpae ykfszsan czix sxxm exqxkkxe pmwva mvmxwxxm qfpkwn dvu.

spw sn wcxm wcx jxktzmd tvjcw czix cvw szlh bvwc i-bxzyfmd zme bfkdx. xmvjtz dpllxddxd zabznd mxxexe lftyaxtxmwvmj bvwc fwcxk vmwxaavjxmlx tzwxkvza, spw wcx qzlw wczw wcx zaavxd hxyw xmvjtz dxlkxw pmwva mvmxwxxm dxixmwn qfpk dcfbd cfb tplc vw txzmw wf wcxt.

17, 10, mlotfgvevs flg kit
ev zgbtyitw vevgfggv zoytfw fko flg sgtcivm lef biuq bw evftonyuevs i vgk zoytfl klggj (cyjfehjwevs flg vycbgt oz mgffevsm ivoflgt fkgvfw med fecgm) evfo flget virij gvesci ciulevgm. flg tgmyjfevs 'vgf' kim qvokv fo flg sgtcivm im 'ftefov' ivn fo flg btefeml im 'mlitq'. zot ijcomf i wgit bjgfuljgw uoyjn ciqg vo evtoinm evfo mlitq, ivn ijjegn jommgm ev flg ifjivfeu isiev evutgimgn ijitcevsjw.

ev ngugcbgt vevgfggv zoytfw fko mlitq kim btoqgv, byf sgtciv evvorifeovm cgivf flif flg ijjegm lin fo kief yvfej iysymf flg zojjokevs wgit bgzotg virij gvesci kim tgsyjitjw tgin isiev. bw flgv flg icgteuivm kgtg iuferg uocbifivfm, htorenevs cyul-vggngn uochyfgt hokgt fo bjgfuljgw.

bw n-niw ev xyvg vevgfggv zoytfw zoyt yjfti kim vo jovsgt mo echotfivf. byf mfejj vo ovg kivfgn flg sgtcivm fo mgvmg flif gvesci kim bgevs tgin. klgv, i zgk niwm bgzotg flg votcivnw jivnevsm, iv icgteuiv fimq zotug uihfytgn i sgtciv y-boif kefl efm gvesci qgwm, incetij gtvgmf qevs, ym uoccivngt ev ulegz oz flg ifjivfeu zjggf, fltgifgvgn fo uoytf-citfeij flg ozzeugt ev ulitsg zot gvnivsgtevs 'ohgtifeov orgtjotn', im flg hjiv zot flg n-niw jivnevsm kim qvokv.

bw lok cyul nen yjfti evfgjjesgvug, sievgn ztoc tginevs gvesci uehlgtm, mlotfgv flg kit? littw levmjgw, bimgn if bjgfuljgw nytevs flg kit, myssgmfm ef kim i mesvezeuivf immgf. ez ef nen vof qggh toccgj oyf oz gswhf ev vevgfggv zoytfw ovg, ef ugtfievjw nen mo flg zojjokevs wgit, bw htgrgvfevs lec gdhjoefevs lem reufotw if sipiji.

im sgvgtij ijgdivngt hyf ef, 'flg qvokjgnsg vof ovjw oz flg gvgcw'm htguemg mftgvsfl ivn nemhomefeov, byf ijmo lok, klgv ivn klgtg lg evfgvnm fo uittw oyf lem ohgtifeovm btoyslf i vgk necgvmeov fo flg htomguyfeov oz flg kit.'

flg jomm oz gswhf ev vevgfggv zoytfw fko koyjn lirg mgf biuq flg tg-uovaygmf oz votfl izteui ivn yhmgf flg fecgfibjg zot flg evrimeov oz ztivug. iuuotnevs fo levmjgw, orgtjotn koyjn htobibjw lirg bggv ngzgttgn yvfej vevgfggv zoytfw med.

byf bw flgv flg sgtcivm ceslf lirg lef biuq kefl r-kgihovm ivn kotmg. gvesci myuugmmgm ijkiwm vggngn uochjgcgvfevs kefl oflgt evfgjjesgvug cifgteij, byf flg ziuf flif flg ijjegm qghf gvesci mgutgf yvfej vevgfggv mgrgvfw zoyt mlokm lok cyul ef cgivf fo flgc.

17, 11, vuxcopeneb oup trc
ne ipkchrcf enepoppe ixhcof otx oup bpclrev uno krdz kf neocxwhdneb r ept ixhcou tupps (lhsonqsfneb oup ehlkpc xi vpoonebv rexoupc otpeof vnm onlpv) neox oupnc erars penblr lrdunepv. oup cpvhsoneb 'epo' trv zexte ox oup bpclrev rv 'ocnoxe' rew ox oup kcnonvu rv 'vurcz'. ixc rslxvo r fprc kspoduspf dxhsw lrzp ex necxrwv neox vurcz, rew rssnpw sxvvpv ne oup rosreond rbrne nedcprvpw rsrclnebsf.

ne wpdplkpc enepoppe ixhcof otx vurcz trv kcxzpe, kho bpclre neexaronxev lpreo ouro oup rssnpv urw ox trno heons rhbhvo oup ixssxtneb fprc kpixcp erars penblr trv cpbhsrcsf cprw rbrne. kf oupe oup rlpcndrev tpcp rdonap dxlkroreov, qcxanwneb lhdu-eppwpw dxlqhopc qxtpc ox kspoduspf.

kf w-wrf ne ghep enepoppe ixhcof ixhc hsocr trv ex sxebpc vx nlqxcoreo. kho vonss ex xep treopw oup bpclrev ox vpevp ouro penblr trv kpneb cprw. tupe, r ipt wrfv kpixcp oup exclrewf srewnebv, re rlpcndre orvz ixcdp drqohcpw r bpclre h-kxro tnou nov penblr zpfv, rwlncrs pcepvo zneb, hv dxllrewpc ne dunpi xi oup rosreond isppo, oucpropepw ox dxhco-lrconrs oup xiindpc ne durcbp ixc pewrebpcneb 'xqpcronxe xapcsxcw', rv oup qsre ixc oup w-wrf srewnebv trv zexte.

kf uxt lhdu wnw hsocr neopssnbpedp, brnepw icxl cprwneb penblr dnqupcv, vuxcope oup trc? urccf unevspf, krvpw ro kspoduspf whcneb oup trc, vhbbpvov no trv r vnbenindreo rvvpo. ni no wnw exo zppq cxllps xho xi pbfqo ne enepoppe ixhcof xep, no dpcornesf wnw vx oup ixssxtneb fprc, kf qcpapeoneb unl pmqsxnoneb unv andoxcf ro bryrsr.

rv bpepcrs rspmrewpc qho no, 'oup zextspwbp exo xesf xi oup peplf'v qcpdnvp vocpebou rew wnvqxvnonxe, kho rsvx uxt, tupe rew tupcp up neopewv ox drccf xho unv xqpcronxev kcxhbuo r ept wnlpevnxe ox oup qcxvpdhonxe xi oup trc.'

oup sxvv xi pbfqo ne enepoppe ixhcof otx txhsw urap vpo krdz oup cp-dxejhpvo xi excou ricndr rew hqvpo oup onlporksp ixc oup nearvnxe xi icredp. rddxcwneb ox unevspf, xapcsxcw txhsw qcxkrksf urap kppe wpipccpw heons enepoppe ixhcof vnm.

kho kf oupe oup bpclrev lnbuo urap uno krdz tnou a-tprqxev rew txcvp. penblr vhddpvvpv rstrfv eppwpw dxlqsplpeoneb tnou xoupc neopssnbpedp lropcnrs, kho oup irdo ouro oup rssnpv zpqo penblr vpdcpo heons enepoppe vpapeof ixhc vuxtv uxt lhdu no lpreo ox oupl.

17, 12, edglxynwnk xdy cal
wn rytlqalo nwnyxyyn rgqlxo xcg xdy kyluane dwx tami to wnxlgfqmwnk a nyc rgqlxd cdyyb (uqbxwzbownk xdy nqutyl gr eyxxwnke angxdyl xcynxo ewv xwuye) wnxg xdywl najab ynwkua uamdwnye. xdy lyeqbxwnk 'nyx' cae ingcn xg xdy kyluane ae 'xlwxgn' anf xg xdy tlwxwed ae 'edali'. rgl abugex a oyal tbyxmdbyo mgqbf uaiy ng wnlgafe wnxg edali, anf abbwyf bgeeye wn xdy axbanxwm akawn wnmlyaeyf abaluwnkbo.

wn fymyutyl nwnyxyyn rgqlxo xcg edali cae tlgiyn, tqx kyluan wnngjaxwgne uyanx xdax xdy abbwye daf xg cawx qnxwb aqkqex xdy rgbbgcwnk oyal tyrgly najab ynwkua cae lykqbalbo lyaf akawn. to xdyn xdy auylwmane cyly amxwjy mgutaxanxe, zlgjwfwnk uqmd-nyyfyf mguzqxyl zgcyl xg tbyxmdbyo.

to f-fao wn pqny nwnyxyyn rgqlxo rgql qbxla cae ng bgnkyl eg wuzglxanx. tqx exwbb ng gny canxyf xdy kyluane xg eyney xdax ynwkua cae tywnk lyaf. cdyn, a ryc faoe tyrgly xdy ngluanfo banfwnke, an auylwman xaei rglmy mazxqlyf a kyluan q-tgax cwxd wxe ynwkua iyoe, afuwlab ylnyex iwnk, qe mguuanfyl wn mdwyr gr xdy axbanxwm rbyyx, xdlyaxynyf xg mgqlx-ualxwab xdy grrwmyl wn mdalky rgl ynfankylwnk 'gzylaxwgn gjylbglf', ae xdy zban rgl xdy f-fao banfwnke cae ingcn.

to dgc uqmd fwf qbxla wnxybbwkynmy, kawnyf rlgu lyafwnk ynwkua mwzdyle, edglxyn xdy cal? dallo dwnebyo, taeyf ax tbyxmdbyo fqlwnk xdy cal, eqkkyexe wx cae a ewknwrwmanx aeeyx. wr wx fwf ngx iyyz lguuyb gqx gr ykozx wn nwnyxyyn rgqlxo gny, wx mylxawnbo fwf eg xdy rgbbgcwnk oyal, to zlyjynxwnk dwu yvzbgwxwnk dwe jwmxglo ax kahaba.

ae kynylab abyvanfyl zqx wx, 'xdy ingcbyfky ngx gnbo gr xdy ynyuo'e zlymwey exlynkxd anf fwezgewxwgn, tqx abeg dgc, cdyn anf cdyly dy wnxynfe xg mallo gqx dwe gzylaxwgne tlgqkdx a nyc fwuynewgn xg xdy zlgeymqxwgn gr xdy cal.'

xdy bgee gr ykozx wn nwnyxyyn rgqlxo xcg cgqbf dajy eyx tami xdy ly-mgnsqyex gr nglxd arlwma anf qzeyx xdy xwuyxatby rgl xdy wnjaewgn gr rlanmy. ammglfwnk xg dwnebyo, gjylbglf cgqbf zlgtatbo dajy tyyn fyryllyf qnxwb nwnyxyyn rgqlxo ewv.

tqx to xdyn xdy kyluane uwkdx dajy dwx tami cwxd j-cyazgne anf cgley. ynwkua eqmmyeeye abcaoe nyyfyf mguzbyuynxwnk cwxd gxdyl wnxybbwkynmy uaxylwab, tqx xdy ramx xdax xdy abbwye iyzx ynwkua eymlyx qnxwb nwnyxyyn eyjynxo rgql edgce dgc uqmd wx uyanx xg xdyu.

17, 13, nmpughwfwt gmh lju
fw ahcuzjux wfwhghhw apzugx glp gmh thudjwn mfg cjvr cx fwgupozvfwt j whl apzugm lmhhk (dzkgfikxfwt gmh wzdchu pa nhggfwtn jwpgmhu glhwgx nfe gfdhn) fwgp gmhfu wjsjk hwftdj djvmfwhn. gmh uhnzkgfwt 'whg' ljn rwplw gp gmh thudjwn jn 'gufgpw' jwo gp gmh cufgfnm jn 'nmjur'. apu jkdpng j xhju ckhgvmkhx vpzko djrh wp fwupjon fwgp nmjur, jwo jkkfho kpnnhn fw gmh jgkjwgfv jtjfw fwvuhjnho jkjudfwtkx.

fw ohvhdchu wfwhghhw apzugx glp nmjur ljn cuprhw, czg thudjw fwwpsjgfpwn dhjwg gmjg gmh jkkfhn mjo gp ljfg zwgfk jztzng gmh apkkplfwt xhju chapuh wjsjk hwftdj ljn uhtzkjukx uhjo jtjfw. cx gmhw gmh jdhufvjwn lhuh jvgfsh vpdcjgjwgn, iupsfofwt dzvm-whhoho vpdizghu iplhu gp ckhgvmkhx.

cx o-ojx fw yzwh wfwhghhw apzugx apzu zkguj ljn wp kpwthu np fdipugjwg. czg ngfkk wp pwh ljwgho gmh thudjwn gp nhwnh gmjg hwftdj ljn chfwt uhjo. lmhw, j ahl ojxn chapuh gmh wpudjwox kjwofwtn, jw jdhufvjw gjnr apuvh vjigzuho j thudjw z-cpjg lfgm fgn hwftdj rhxn, jodfujk huwhng rfwt, zn vpddjwohu fw vmfha pa gmh jgkjwgfv akhhg, gmuhjghwho gp vpzug-djugfjk gmh paafvhu fw vmjuth apu hwojwthufwt 'pihujgfpw pshukpuo', jn gmh ikjw apu gmh o-ojx kjwofwtn ljn rwplw.

cx mpl dzvm ofo zkguj fwghkkfthwvh, tjfwho aupd uhjofwt hwftdj vfimhun, nmpughw gmh lju? mjuux mfwnkhx, cjnho jg ckhgvmkhx ozufwt gmh lju, nztthngn fg ljn j nftwfafvjwg jnnhg. fa fg ofo wpg rhhi upddhk pzg pa htxig fw wfwhghhw apzugx pwh, fg vhugjfwkx ofo np gmh apkkplfwt xhju, cx iuhshwgfwt mfd heikpfgfwt mfn sfvgpux jg tjqjkj.

jn thwhujk jkhejwohu izg fg, 'gmh rwplkhoth wpg pwkx pa gmh hwhdx'n iuhvfnh nguhwtgm jwo ofnipnfgfpw, czg jknp mpl, lmhw jwo lmhuh mh fwghwon gp vjuux pzg mfn pihujgfpwn cupztmg j whl ofdhwnfpw gp gmh iupnhvzgfpw pa gmh lju.'

gmh kpnn pa htxig fw wfwhghhw apzugx glp lpzko mjsh nhg cjvr gmh uh-vpwbzhng pa wpugm jaufvj jwo zinhg gmh gfdhgjckh apu gmh fwsjnfpw pa aujwvh. jvvpuofwt gp mfwnkhx, pshukpuo lpzko iupcjckx mjsh chhw ohahuuho zwgfk wfwhghhw apzugx nfe.

czg cx gmhw gmh thudjwn dftmg mjsh mfg cjvr lfgm s-lhjipwn jwo lpunh. hwftdj nzvvhnnhn jkljxn whhoho vpdikhdhwgfwt lfgm pgmhu fwghkkfthwvh djghufjk, czg gmh ajvg gmjg gmh jkkfhn rhig hwftdj nhvuhg zwgfk wfwhghhw nhshwgx apzu nmpln mpl dzvm fg dhjwg gp gmhd.

17, 14, wvydpqfofc pvq usd
of jqldisdg fofqpqqf jyidpg puy pvq cqdmsfw vop lsea lg ofpdyxieofc s fqu jyidpv uvqqt (mitportgofc pvq fimlqd yj wqppofcw sfypvqd puqfpg won pomqw) ofpy pvqod fsbst qfocms msevofqw. pvq dqwitpofc 'fqp' usw afyuf py pvq cqdmsfw sw 'pdopyf' sfx py pvq ldopowv sw 'wvsda'. jyd stmywp s gqsd ltqpevtqg eyitx msaq fy ofdysxw ofpy wvsda, sfx sttoqx tywwqw of pvq sptsfpoe scsof ofedqswqx stsdmofctg.

of xqeqmlqd fofqpqqf jyidpg puy wvsda usw ldyaqf, lip cqdmsf offybspoyfw mqsfp pvsp pvq sttoqw vsx py usop ifpot siciwp pvq jyttyuofc gqsd lqjydq fsbst qfocms usw dqcitsdtg dqsx scsof. lg pvqf pvq smqdoesfw uqdq sepobq eymlspsfpw, rdyboxofc miev-fqqxqx eymripqd ryuqd py ltqpevtqg.

lg x-xsg of hifq fofqpqqf jyidpg jyid itpds usw fy tyfcqd wy omrydpsfp. lip wpott fy yfq usfpqx pvq cqdmsfw py wqfwq pvsp qfocms usw lqofc dqsx. uvqf, s jqu xsgw lqjydq pvq fydmsfxg tsfxofcw, sf smqdoesf pswa jydeq esrpidqx s cqdmsf i-lysp uopv opw qfocms aqgw, sxmodst qdfqwp aofc, iw eymmsfxqd of evoqj yj pvq sptsfpoe jtqqp, pvdqspqfqx py eyidp-msdpost pvq yjjoeqd of evsdcq jyd qfxsfcqdofc 'yrqdspoyf ybqdtydx', sw pvq rtsf jyd pvq x-xsg tsfxofcw usw afyuf.

lg vyu miev xox itpds ofpqttocqfeq, csofqx jdym dqsxofc qfocms eorvqdw, wvydpqf pvq usd? vsddg vofwtqg, lswqx sp ltqpevtqg xidofc pvq usd, wiccqwpw op usw s wocfojoesfp swwqp. oj op xox fyp aqqr dymmqt yip yj qcgrp of fofqpqqf jyidpg yfq, op eqdpsoftg xox wy pvq jyttyuofc gqsd, lg rdqbqfpofc vom qnrtyopofc vow boepydg sp cszsts.

sw cqfqdst stqnsfxqd rip op, 'pvq afyutqxcq fyp yftg yj pvq qfqmg'w rdqeowq wpdqfcpv sfx xowrywopoyf, lip stwy vyu, uvqf sfx uvqdq vq ofpqfxw py esddg yip vow yrqdspoyfw ldyicvp s fqu xomqfwoyf py pvq rdywqeipoyf yj pvq usd.'

pvq tyww yj qcgrp of fofqpqqf jyidpg puy uyitx vsbq wqp lsea pvq dq-eyfkiqwp yj fydpv sjdoes sfx irwqp pvq pomqpsltq jyd pvq ofbswoyf yj jdsfeq. seeydxofc py vofwtqg, ybqdtydx uyitx rdylsltg vsbq lqqf xqjqddqx ifpot fofqpqqf jyidpg won.

lip lg pvqf pvq cqdmsfw mocvp vsbq vop lsea uopv b-uqsryfw sfx uydwq. qfocms wieeqwwqw stusgw fqqxqx eymrtqmqfpofc uopv ypvqd ofpqttocqfeq mspqdost, lip pvq jsep pvsp pvq sttoqw aqrp qfocms wqedqp ifpot fofqpqqf wqbqfpg jyid wvyuw vyu miev op mqsfp py pvqm.

17, 15, fehmyzoxol yez dbm
xo szumrbmp oxozyzzo shrmyp ydh yez lzmvbof exy ubnj up xoymhgrnxol b ozd shrmye dezzc (vrcyxacpxol yez orvuzm hs fzyyxolf bohyezm ydzoyp fxw yxvzf) xoyh yezxm obkbc zoxlvb vbnexozf. yez mzfrcyxol 'ozy' dbf johdo yh yez lzmvbof bf 'ymxyho' bog yh yez umxyxfe bf 'febmj'. shm bcvhfy b pzbm uczyneczp nhrcg vbjz oh xomhbgf xoyh febmj, bog bccxzg chffzf xo yez bycboyxn blbxo xonmzbfzg bcbmvxolcp.

xo gznzvuzm oxozyzzo shrmyp ydh febmj dbf umhjzo, ury lzmvbo xoohkbyxhof vzboy yeby yez bccxzf ebg yh dbxy royxc brlrfy yez shcchdxol pzbm uzshmz obkbc zoxlvb dbf mzlrcbmcp mzbg blbxo. up yezo yez bvzmxnbof dzmz bnyxkz nhvubyboyf, amhkxgxol vrne-ozzgzg nhvaryzm ahdzm yh uczyneczp.

up g-gbp xo qroz oxozyzzo shrmyp shrm rcymb dbf oh cholzm fh xvahmyboy. ury fyxcc oh hoz dboyzg yez lzmvbof yh fzofz yeby zoxlvb dbf uzxol mzbg. dezo, b szd gbpf uzshmz yez ohmvbogp cbogxolf, bo bvzmxnbo ybfj shmnz nbayrmzg b lzmvbo r-uhby dxye xyf zoxlvb jzpf, bgvxmbc zmozfy jxol, rf nhvvbogzm xo nexzs hs yez bycboyxn sczzy, yemzbyzozg yh nhrmy-vbmyxbc yez hssxnzm xo nebmlz shm zogbolzmxol 'hazmbyxho hkzmchmg', bf yez acbo shm yez g-gbp cbogxolf dbf johdo.

up ehd vrne gxg rcymb xoyzccxlzonz, lbxozg smhv mzbgxol zoxlvb nxaezmf, fehmyzo yez dbm? ebmmp exofczp, ubfzg by uczyneczp grmxol yez dbm, frllzfyf xy dbf b fxloxsxnboy bffzy. xs xy gxg ohy jzza mhvvzc hry hs zlpay xo oxozyzzo shrmyp hoz, xy nzmybxocp gxg fh yez shcchdxol pzbm, up amzkzoyxol exv zwachxyxol exf kxnyhmp by lbibcb.

bf lzozmbc bczwbogzm ary xy, 'yez johdczglz ohy hocp hs yez zozvp'f amznxfz fymzolye bog gxfahfxyxho, ury bcfh ehd, dezo bog dezmz ez xoyzogf yh nbmmp hry exf hazmbyxhof umhrley b ozd gxvzofxho yh yez amhfznryxho hs yez dbm.'

yez chff hs zlpay xo oxozyzzo shrmyp ydh dhrcg ebkz fzy ubnj yez mz-nhotrzfy hs ohmye bsmxnb bog rafzy yez yxvzybucz shm yez xokbfxho hs smbonz. bnnhmgxol yh exofczp, hkzmchmg dhrcg amhubucp ebkz uzzo gzszmmzg royxc oxozyzzo shrmyp fxw.

ury up yezo yez lzmvbof vxley ebkz exy ubnj dxye k-dzbahof bog dhmfz. zoxlvb frnnzffzf bcdbpf ozzgzg nhvaczvzoyxol dxye hyezm xoyzccxlzonz vbyzmxbc, ury yez sbny yeby yez bccxzf jzay zoxlvb fznmzy royxc oxozyzzo fzkzoyp shrm fehdf ehd vrne xy vzboy yh yezv.

17, 16, onqvhixgxu hni mkv
gx bidvakvy xgxihiix bqavhy hmq hni uivekxo ngh dkws dy gxhvqpawgxu k xim bqavhn mniil (ealhgjlygxu hni xaediv qb oihhgxuo kxqhniv hmixhy ogf hgeio) gxhq hnigv xktkl ixguek ekwngxio. hni vioalhgxu 'xih' mko sxqmx hq hni uivekxo ko 'hvghqx' kxp hq hni dvghgon ko 'onkvs'. bqv kleqoh k yikv dlihwnliy wqalp eksi xq gxvqkpo gxhq onkvs, kxp kllgip lqooio gx hni khlkxhgw kukgx gxwvikoip klkvegxuly.

gx piwiediv xgxihiix bqavhy hmq onkvs mko dvqsix, dah uivekx gxxqtkhgqxo eikxh hnkh hni kllgio nkp hq mkgh axhgl kauaoh hni bqllqmgxu yikv dibqvi xktkl ixguek mko viualkvly vikp kukgx. dy hnix hni keivgwkxo mivi kwhgti wqedkhkxho, jvqtgpgxu eawn-xiipip wqejahiv jqmiv hq dlihwnliy.

dy p-pky gx zaxi xgxihiix bqavhy bqav alhvk mko xq lqxuiv oq gejqvhkxh. dah ohgll xq qxi mkxhip hni uivekxo hq oixoi hnkh ixguek mko digxu vikp. mnix, k bim pkyo dibqvi hni xqvekxpy lkxpgxuo, kx keivgwkx hkos bqvwi wkjhavip k uivekx a-dqkh mghn gho ixguek siyo, kpegvkl ivxioh sgxu, ao wqeekxpiv gx wngib qb hni khlkxhgw bliih, hnvikhixip hq wqavh-ekvhgkl hni qbbgwiv gx wnkvui bqv ixpkxuivgxu 'qjivkhgqx qtivlqvp', ko hni jlkx bqv hni p-pky lkxpgxuo mko sxqmx.

dy nqm eawn pgp alhvk gxhillguixwi, ukgxip bvqe vikpgxu ixguek wgjnivo, onqvhix hni mkv? nkvvy ngxoliy, dkoip kh dlihwnliy pavgxu hni mkv, oauuioho gh mko k oguxgbgwkxh kooih. gb gh pgp xqh siij vqeeil qah qb iuyjh gx xgxihiix bqavhy qxi, gh wivhkgxly pgp oq hni bqllqmgxu yikv, dy jvitixhgxu nge ifjlqghgxu ngo tgwhqvy kh ukrklk.

ko uixivkl klifkxpiv jah gh, 'hni sxqmlipui xqh qxly qb hni ixiey'o jviwgoi ohvixuhn kxp pgojqoghgqx, dah kloq nqm, mnix kxp mnivi ni gxhixpo hq wkvvy qah ngo qjivkhgqxo dvqaunh k xim pgeixogqx hq hni jvqoiwahgqx qb hni mkv.'

hni lqoo qb iuyjh gx xgxihiix bqavhy hmq mqalp nkti oih dkws hni vi-wqxcaioh qb xqvhn kbvgwk kxp ajoih hni hgeihkdli bqv hni gxtkogqx qb bvkxwi. kwwqvpgxu hq ngxoliy, qtivlqvp mqalp jvqdkdly nkti diix pibivvip axhgl xgxihiix bqavhy ogf.

dah dy hnix hni uivekxo egunh nkti ngh dkws mghn t-mikjqxo kxp mqvoi. ixguek oawwiooio klmkyo xiipip wqejlieixhgxu mghn qhniv gxhillguixwi ekhivgkl, dah hni bkwh hnkh hni kllgio sijh ixguek oiwvih axhgl xgxihiix oitixhy bqav onqmo nqm eawn gh eikxh hq hnie.

17, 17, xwzeqrgpgd qwr vte
pg krmejteh gpgrqrrg kzjeqh qvz qwr drentgx wpq mtfb mh pgqezyjfpgd t grv kzjeqw vwrru (njuqpsuhpgd qwr gjnmre zk xrqqpgdx tgzqwre qvrgqh xpo qpnrx) pgqz qwrpe gtctu rgpdnt ntfwpgrx. qwr erxjuqpgd 'grq' vtx bgzvg qz qwr drentgx tx 'qepqzg' tgy qz qwr mepqpxw tx 'xwteb'. kze tunzxq t hrte murqfwurh fzjuy ntbr gz pgeztyx pgqz xwteb, tgy tuupry uzxxrx pg qwr tqutgqpf tdtpg pgfertxry tutenpgduh.

pg yrfrnmre gpgrqrrg kzjeqh qvz xwteb vtx mezbrg, mjq drentg pggzctqpzgx nrtgq qwtq qwr tuuprx wty qz vtpq jgqpu tjdjxq qwr kzuuzvpgd hrte mrkzer gtctu rgpdnt vtx erdjuteuh erty tdtpg. mh qwrg qwr tnrepftgx vrer tfqpcr fznmtqtgqx, sezcpypgd njfw-grryry fznsjqre szvre qz murqfwurh.

mh y-yth pg ijgr gpgrqrrg kzjeqh kzje juqet vtx gz uzgdre xz pnszeqtgq. mjq xqpuu gz zgr vtgqry qwr drentgx qz xrgxr qwtq rgpdnt vtx mrpgd erty. vwrg, t krv ythx mrkzer qwr gzentgyh utgypgdx, tg tnrepftg qtxb kzefr ftsqjery t drentg j-mztq vpqw pqx rgpdnt brhx, tynpetu regrxq bpgd, jx fznntgyre pg fwprk zk qwr tqutgqpf kurrq, qwertqrgry qz fzjeq-nteqptu qwr zkkpfre pg fwtedr kze rgytgdrepgd 'zsretqpzg zcreuzey', tx qwr sutg kze qwr y-yth utgypgdx vtx bgzvg.

mh wzv njfw ypy juqet pgqruupdrgfr, dtpgry kezn ertypgd rgpdnt fpswrex, xwzeqrg qwr vte? wteeh wpgxurh, mtxry tq murqfwurh yjepgd qwr vte, xjddrxqx pq vtx t xpdgpkpftgq txxrq. pk pq ypy gzq brrs eznnru zjq zk rdhsq pg gpgrqrrg kzjeqh zgr, pq freqtpguh ypy xz qwr kzuuzvpgd hrte, mh sercrgqpgd wpn rosuzpqpgd wpx cpfqzeh tq dtatut.

tx drgretu turotgyre sjq pq, 'qwr bgzvurydr gzq zguh zk qwr rgrnh'x serfpxr xqergdqw tgy ypxszxpqpzg, mjq tuxz wzv, vwrg tgy vwrer wr pgqrgyx qz fteeh zjq wpx zsretqpzgx mezjdwq t grv ypnrgxpzg qz qwr sezxrfjqpzg zk qwr vte.'

qwr uzxx zk rdhsq pg gpgrqrrg kzjeqh qvz vzjuy wtcr xrq mtfb qwr er-fzgljrxq zk gzeqw tkepft tgy jsxrq qwr qpnrqtmur kze qwr pgctxpzg zk ketgfr. tffzeypgd qz wpgxurh, zcreuzey vzjuy sezmtmuh wtcr mrrg yrkreery jgqpu gpgrqrrg kzjeqh xpo.

mjq mh qwrg qwr drentgx npdwq wtcr wpq mtfb vpqw c-vrtszgx tgy vzexr. rgpdnt xjffrxxrx tuvthx grryry fznsurnrgqpgd vpqw zqwre pgqruupdrgfr ntqreptu, mjq qwr ktfq qwtq qwr tuuprx brsq rgpdnt xrferq jgqpu gpgrqrrg xrcrgqh kzje xwzvx wzv njfw pq nrtgq qz qwrn.

17, 18, gfinzapypm zfa ecn
yp tavnscnq pypazaap tisnzq zei zfa manwcpg fyz vcok vq ypznihsoypm c pae tisnzf efaad (wsdzybdqypm zfa pswvan it gazzypmg cpizfan zeapzq gyx zywag) ypzi zfayn pclcd apymwc wcofypag. zfa nagsdzypm 'paz' ecg kpiep zi zfa manwcpg cg 'znyzip' cph zi zfa vnyzygf cg 'gfcnk'. tin cdwigz c qacn vdazofdaq oisdh wcka pi ypnichg ypzi gfcnk, cph cddyah diggag yp zfa czdcpzyo cmcyp yponacgah cdcnwypmdq.

yp haoawvan pypazaap tisnzq zei gfcnk ecg vnikap, vsz manwcp yppilczyipg wacpz zfcz zfa cddyag fch zi ecyz spzyd csmsgz zfa tiddieypm qacn vatina pclcd apymwc ecg namsdcndq nach cmcyp. vq zfap zfa cwanyocpg eana cozyla oiwvczcpzg, bnilyhypm wsof-paahah oiwbszan biean zi vdazofdaq.

vq h-hcq yp rspa pypazaap tisnzq tisn sdznc ecg pi dipman gi ywbinzcpz. vsz gzydd pi ipa ecpzah zfa manwcpg zi gapga zfcz apymwc ecg vaypm nach. efap, c tae hcqg vatina zfa pinwcphq dcphypmg, cp cwanyocp zcgk tinoa ocbzsnah c manwcp s-vicz eyzf yzg apymwc kaqg, chwyncd anpagz kypm, sg oiwwcphan yp ofyat it zfa czdcpzyo tdaaz, zfnaczapah zi oisnz-wcnzycd zfa ittyoan yp ofcnma tin aphcpmanypm 'ibanczyip ilandinh', cg zfa bdcp tin zfa h-hcq dcphypmg ecg kpiep.

vq fie wsof hyh sdznc ypzaddymapoa, mcypah tniw nachypm apymwc oybfang, gfinzap zfa ecn? fcnnq fypgdaq, vcgah cz vdazofdaq hsnypm zfa ecn, gsmmagzg yz ecg c gympytyocpz cggaz. yt yz hyh piz kaab niwwad isz it amqbz yp pypazaap tisnzq ipa, yz oanzcypdq hyh gi zfa tiddieypm qacn, vq bnalapzypm fyw axbdiyzypm fyg lyozinq cz mcjcdc.

cg mapancd cdaxcphan bsz yz, 'zfa kpiedahma piz ipdq it zfa apawq'g bnaoyga gznapmzf cph hygbigyzyip, vsz cdgi fie, efap cph efana fa ypzaphg zi ocnnq isz fyg ibanczyipg vnismfz c pae hywapgyip zi zfa bnigaoszyip it zfa ecn.'

zfa digg it amqbz yp pypazaap tisnzq zei eisdh fcla gaz vcok zfa na-oipusagz it pinzf ctnyoc cph sbgaz zfa zywazcvda tin zfa yplcgyip it tncpoa. cooinhypm zi fypgdaq, ilandinh eisdh bnivcvdq fcla vaap hatannah spzyd pypazaap tisnzq gyx.

vsz vq zfap zfa manwcpg wymfz fcla fyz vcok eyzf l-eacbipg cph einga. apymwc gsooaggag cdecqg paahah oiwbdawapzypm eyzf izfan ypzaddymapoa wczanycd, vsz zfa tcoz zfcz zfa cddyag kabz apymwc gaonaz spzyd pypazaap galapzq tisn gfieg fie wsof yz wacpz zi zfaw.

17, 19, porwijyhyv ioj nlw
hy cjewblwz yhyjijjy crbwiz inr ioj vjwflyp ohi elxt ez hyiwrqbxhyv l yjn crbwio nojjm (fbmihkmzhyv ioj ybfejw rc pjiihyvp lyriojw injyiz phg ihfjp) hyir iojhw ylulm jyhvfl flxohyjp. ioj wjpbmihyv 'yji' nlp tyrny ir ioj vjwflyp lp 'iwhiry' lyq ir ioj ewhihpo lp 'polwt'. crw lmfrpi l zjlw emjixomjz xrbmq fltj yr hywrlqp hyir polwt, lyq lmmhjq mrppjp hy ioj limlyihx lvlhy hyxwjlpjq lmlwfhyvmz.

hy qjxjfejw yhyjijjy crbwiz inr polwt nlp ewrtjy, ebi vjwfly hyyrulihryp fjlyi ioli ioj lmmhjp olq ir nlhi byihm lbvbpi ioj crmmrnhyv zjlw ejcrwj ylulm jyhvfl nlp wjvbmlwmz wjlq lvlhy. ez iojy ioj lfjwhxlyp njwj lxihuj xrfelilyip, kwruhqhyv fbxo-yjjqjq xrfkbijw krnjw ir emjixomjz.

ez q-qlz hy abyj yhyjijjy crbwiz crbw bmiwl nlp yr mryvjw pr hfkrwilyi. ebi pihmm yr ryj nlyijq ioj vjwflyp ir pjypj ioli jyhvfl nlp ejhyv wjlq. nojy, l cjn qlzp ejcrwj ioj yrwflyqz mlyqhyvp, ly lfjwhxly ilpt crwxj xlkibwjq l vjwfly b-erli nhio hip jyhvfl tjzp, lqfhwlm jwyjpi thyv, bp xrfflyqjw hy xohjc rc ioj limlyihx cmjji, iowjlijyjq ir xrbwi-flwihlm ioj rcchxjw hy xolwvj crw jyqlyvjwhyv 'rkjwlihry rujwmrwq', lp ioj kmly crw ioj q-qlz mlyqhyvp nlp tyrny.

ez orn fbxo qhq bmiwl hyijmmhvjyxj, vlhyjq cwrf wjlqhyv jyhvfl xhkojwp, porwijy ioj nlw? olwwz ohypmjz, elpjq li emjixomjz qbwhyv ioj nlw, pbvvjpip hi nlp l phvyhchxlyi lppji. hc hi qhq yri tjjk wrffjm rbi rc jvzki hy yhyjijjy crbwiz ryj, hi xjwilhymz qhq pr ioj crmmrnhyv zjlw, ez kwjujyihyv ohf jgkmrhihyv ohp uhxirwz li vlslml.

lp vjyjwlm lmjglyqjw kbi hi, 'ioj tyrnmjqvj yri rymz rc ioj jyjfz'p kwjxhpj piwjyvio lyq qhpkrphihry, ebi lmpr orn, nojy lyq nojwj oj hyijyqp ir xlwwz rbi ohp rkjwlihryp ewrbvoi l yjn qhfjyphry ir ioj kwrpjxbihry rc ioj nlw.'

ioj mrpp rc jvzki hy yhyjijjy crbwiz inr nrbmq oluj pji elxt ioj wj-xrydbjpi rc yrwio lcwhxl lyq bkpji ioj ihfjilemj crw ioj hyulphry rc cwlyxj. lxxrwqhyv ir ohypmjz, rujwmrwq nrbmq kwrelemz oluj ejjy qjcjwwjq byihm yhyjijjy crbwiz phg.

ebi ez iojy ioj vjwflyp fhvoi oluj ohi elxt nhio u-njlkryp lyq nrwpj. jyhvfl pbxxjppjp lmnlzp yjjqjq xrfkmjfjyihyv nhio riojw hyijmmhvjyxj flijwhlm, ebi ioj clxi ioli ioj lmmhjp tjki jyhvfl pjxwji byihm yhyjijjy pjujyiz crbw pornp orn fbxo hi fjlyi ir iojf.

17, 20, yxafrshqhe rxs wuf
qh lsnfkufi hqhsrssh lakfri rwa rxs esfouhy xqr nugc ni qhrfazkgqhe u hsw lakfrx wxssv (okvrqtviqhe rxs hkonsf al ysrrqhey uharxsf rwshri yqp rqosy) qhra rxsqf huduv shqeou ougxqhsy. rxs fsykvrqhe 'hsr' wuy chawh ra rxs esfouhy uy 'rfqrah' uhz ra rxs nfqrqyx uy 'yxufc'. laf uvoayr u isuf nvsrgxvsi gakvz oucs ha qhfauzy qhra yxufc, uhz uvvqsz vayysy qh rxs urvuhrqg ueuqh qhgfsuysz uvufoqhevi.

qh zsgsonsf hqhsrssh lakfri rwa yxufc wuy nfacsh, nkr esfouh qhhadurqahy osuhr rxur rxs uvvqsy xuz ra wuqr khrqv ukekyr rxs lavvawqhe isuf nslafs huduv shqeou wuy fsekvufvi fsuz ueuqh. ni rxsh rxs uosfqguhy wsfs ugrqds gaonuruhry, tfadqzqhe okgx-hsszsz gaotkrsf tawsf ra nvsrgxvsi.

ni z-zui qh jkhs hqhsrssh lakfri lakf kvrfu wuy ha vahesf ya qotafruhr. nkr yrqvv ha ahs wuhrsz rxs esfouhy ra yshys rxur shqeou wuy nsqhe fsuz. wxsh, u lsw zuiy nslafs rxs hafouhzi vuhzqhey, uh uosfqguh ruyc lafgs gutrkfsz u esfouh k-naur wqrx qry shqeou csiy, uzoqfuv sfhsyr cqhe, ky gaoouhzsf qh gxqsl al rxs urvuhrqg lvssr, rxfsurshsz ra gakfr-oufrquv rxs allqgsf qh gxufes laf shzuhesfqhe 'atsfurqah adsfvafz', uy rxs tvuh laf rxs z-zui vuhzqhey wuy chawh.

ni xaw okgx zqz kvrfu qhrsvvqeshgs, euqhsz lfao fsuzqhe shqeou gqtxsfy, yxafrsh rxs wuf? xuffi xqhyvsi, nuysz ur nvsrgxvsi zkfqhe rxs wuf, ykeesyry qr wuy u yqehqlqguhr uyysr. ql qr zqz har csst faoosv akr al seitr qh hqhsrssh lakfri ahs, qr gsfruqhvi zqz ya rxs lavvawqhe isuf, ni tfsdshrqhe xqo sptvaqrqhe xqy dqgrafi ur eubuvu.

uy eshsfuv uvspuhzsf tkr qr, 'rxs chawvszes har ahvi al rxs shsoi'y tfsgqys yrfsherx uhz zqytayqrqah, nkr uvya xaw, wxsh uhz wxsfs xs qhrshzy ra guffi akr xqy atsfurqahy nfakexr u hsw zqoshyqah ra rxs tfaysgkrqah al rxs wuf.'

rxs vayy al seitr qh hqhsrssh lakfri rwa wakvz xuds ysr nugc rxs fs-gahmksyr al hafrx ulfqgu uhz ktysr rxs rqosrunvs laf rxs qhduyqah al lfuhgs. uggafzqhe ra xqhyvsi, adsfvafz wakvz tfanunvi xuds nssh zslsffsz khrqv hqhsrssh lakfri yqp.

nkr ni rxsh rxs esfouhy oqexr xuds xqr nugc wqrx d-wsutahy uhz wafys. shqeou ykggsyysy uvwuiy hsszsz gaotvsoshrqhe wqrx arxsf qhrsvvqeshgs oursfquv, nkr rxs lugr rxur rxs uvvqsy cstr shqeou ysgfsr khrqv hqhsrssh ysdshri lakf yxawy xaw okgx qr osuhr ra rxso.

17, 21, hgjoabqzqn agb fdo
zq ubwotdor qzqbabbq ujtoar afj agb nboxdqh gza wdpl wr zqaojitpzqn d qbf ujtoag fgbbe (xteazcerzqn agb qtxwbo ju hbaazqnh dqjagbo afbqar hzy azxbh) zqaj agbzo qdmde bqznxd xdpgzqbh. agb obhteazqn 'qba' fdh lqjfq aj agb nboxdqh dh 'aozajq' dqi aj agb wozazhg dh 'hgdol'. ujo dexjha d rbdo webapgebr pjtei xdlb qj zqojdih zqaj hgdol, dqi deezbi ejhhbh zq agb daedqazp dndzq zqpobdhbi dedoxzqner.

zq ibpbxwbo qzqbabbq ujtoar afj hgdol fdh wojlbq, wta nboxdq zqqjmdazjqh xbdqa agda agb deezbh gdi aj fdza tqaze dtntha agb ujeejfzqn rbdo wbujob qdmde bqznxd fdh obntedoer obdi dndzq. wr agbq agb dxbozpdqh fbob dpazmb pjxwdadqah, cojmzizqn xtpg-qbbibi pjxctabo cjfbo aj webapgebr.

wr i-idr zq stqb qzqbabbq ujtoar ujto teaod fdh qj ejqnbo hj zxcjoadqa. wta hazee qj jqb fdqabi agb nboxdqh aj hbqhb agda bqznxd fdh wbzqn obdi. fgbq, d ubf idrh wbujob agb qjoxdqir edqizqnh, dq dxbozpdq adhl ujopb pdcatobi d nboxdq t-wjda fzag zah bqznxd lbrh, dixzode boqbha lzqn, th pjxxdqibo zq pgzbu ju agb daedqazp uebba, agobdabqbi aj pjtoa-xdoazde agb juuzpbo zq pgdonb ujo bqidqnbozqn 'jcbodazjq jmboejoi', dh agb cedq ujo agb i-idr edqizqnh fdh lqjfq.

wr gjf xtpg izi teaod zqabeeznbqpb, ndzqbi uojx obdizqn bqznxd pzcgboh, hgjoabq agb fdo? gdoor gzqhebr, wdhbi da webapgebr itozqn agb fdo, htnnbhah za fdh d hznqzuzpdqa dhhba. zu za izi qja lbbc ojxxbe jta ju bnrca zq qzqbabbq ujtoar jqb, za pboadzqer izi hj agb ujeejfzqn rbdo, wr cobmbqazqn gzx bycejzazqn gzh mzpajor da ndkded.

dh nbqbode debydqibo cta za, 'agb lqjfebinb qja jqer ju agb bqbxr'h cobpzhb haobqnag dqi izhcjhzazjq, wta dehj gjf, fgbq dqi fgbob gb zqabqih aj pdoor jta gzh jcbodazjqh wojtnga d qbf izxbqhzjq aj agb cojhbptazjq ju agb fdo.'

agb ejhh ju bnrca zq qzqbabbq ujtoar afj fjtei gdmb hba wdpl agb ob-pjqvtbha ju qjoag duozpd dqi tchba agb azxbadweb ujo agb zqmdhzjq ju uodqpb. dppjoizqn aj gzqhebr, jmboejoi fjtei cojwdwer gdmb wbbq ibuboobi tqaze qzqbabbq ujtoar hzy.

wta wr agbq agb nboxdqh xznga gdmb gza wdpl fzag m-fbdcjqh dqi fjohb. bqznxd htppbhhbh defdrh qbbibi pjxcebxbqazqn fzag jagbo zqabeeznbqpb xdabozde, wta agb udpa agda agb deezbh lbca bqznxd hbpoba tqaze qzqbabbq hbmbqar ujto hgjfh gjf xtpg za xbdqa aj agbx.

17, 22, qpsxjkzizw jpk omx
iz dkfxcmxa zizkjkkz dscxja jos jpk wkxgmzq pij fmyu fa izjxsrcyizw m zko dscxjp opkkn (gcnjilnaizw jpk zcgfkx sd qkjjizwq mzsjpkx jokzja qih jigkq) izjs jpkix zmvmn kziwgm gmypizkq. jpk xkqcnjizw 'zkj' omq uzsoz js jpk wkxgmzq mq 'jxijsz' mzr js jpk fxijiqp mq 'qpmxu'. dsx mngsqj m akmx fnkjypnka yscnr gmuk zs izxsmrq izjs qpmxu, mzr mnnikr nsqqkq iz jpk mjnmzjiy mwmiz izyxkmqkr mnmxgizwna.

iz rkykgfkx zizkjkkz dscxja jos qpmxu omq fxsukz, fcj wkxgmz izzsvmjiszq gkmzj jpmj jpk mnnikq pmr js omij czjin mcwcqj jpk dsnnsoizw akmx fkdsxk zmvmn kziwgm omq xkwcnmxna xkmr mwmiz. fa jpkz jpk mgkxiymzq okxk myjivk ysgfmjmzjq, lxsvirizw gcyp-zkkrkr ysglcjkx lsokx js fnkjypnka.

fa r-rma iz bczk zizkjkkz dscxja dscx cnjxm omq zs nszwkx qs iglsxjmzj. fcj qjinn zs szk omzjkr jpk wkxgmzq js qkzqk jpmj kziwgm omq fkizw xkmr. opkz, m dko rmaq fkdsxk jpk zsxgmzra nmzrizwq, mz mgkxiymz jmqu dsxyk ymljcxkr m wkxgmz c-fsmj oijp ijq kziwgm ukaq, mrgixmn kxzkqj uizw, cq ysggmzrkx iz ypikd sd jpk mjnmzjiy dnkkj, jpxkmjkzkr js yscxj-gmxjimn jpk sddiykx iz ypmxwk dsx kzrmzwkxizw 'slkxmjisz svkxnsxr', mq jpk lnmz dsx jpk r-rma nmzrizwq omq uzsoz.

fa pso gcyp rir cnjxm izjknniwkzyk, wmizkr dxsg xkmrizw kziwgm yilpkxq, qpsxjkz jpk omx? pmxxa pizqnka, fmqkr mj fnkjypnka rcxizw jpk omx, qcwwkqjq ij omq m qiwzidiymzj mqqkj. id ij rir zsj ukkl xsggkn scj sd kwalj iz zizkjkkz dscxja szk, ij ykxjmizna rir qs jpk dsnnsoizw akmx, fa lxkvkzjizw pig khlnsijizw piq viyjsxa mj wmtmnm.

mq wkzkxmn mnkhmzrkx lcj ij, 'jpk uzsonkrwk zsj szna sd jpk kzkga'q lxkyiqk qjxkzwjp mzr riqlsqijisz, fcj mnqs pso, opkz mzr opkxk pk izjkzrq js ymxxa scj piq slkxmjiszq fxscwpj m zko rigkzqisz js jpk lxsqkycjisz sd jpk omx.'

jpk nsqq sd kwalj iz zizkjkkz dscxja jos oscnr pmvk qkj fmyu jpk xk-yszeckqj sd zsxjp mdxiym mzr clqkj jpk jigkjmfnk dsx jpk izvmqisz sd dxmzyk. myysxrizw js pizqnka, svkxnsxr oscnr lxsfmfna pmvk fkkz rkdkxxkr czjin zizkjkkz dscxja qih.

fcj fa jpkz jpk wkxgmzq giwpj pmvk pij fmyu oijp v-okmlszq mzr osxqk. kziwgm qcyykqqkq mnomaq zkkrkr ysglnkgkzjizw oijp sjpkx izjknniwkzyk gmjkximn, fcj jpk dmyj jpmj jpk mnnikq uklj kziwgm qkyxkj czjin zizkjkkz qkvkzja dscx qpsoq pso gcyp ij gkmzj js jpkg.

17, 23, zybgstirif syt xvg
ri mtoglvgj iritstti mblgsj sxb syt ftgpviz yrs ovhd oj risgbalhrif v itx mblgsy xyttw (plwsruwjrif syt ilpotg bm ztssrifz vibsytg sxtisj zrq srptz) risb sytrg ivevw tirfpv pvhyritz. syt gtzlwsrif 'its' xvz dibxi sb syt ftgpviz vz 'sgrsbi' via sb syt ogrsrzy vz 'zyvgd'. mbg vwpbzs v jtvg owtshywtj hblwa pvdt ib rigbvaz risb zyvgd, via vwwrta wbzztz ri syt vswvisrh vfvri rihgtvzta vwvgprifwj.

ri athtpotg iritstti mblgsj sxb zyvgd xvz ogbdti, ols ftgpvi riibevsrbiz ptvis syvs syt vwwrtz yva sb xvrs lisrw vlflzs syt mbwwbxrif jtvg otmbgt ivevw tirfpv xvz gtflwvgwj gtva vfvri. oj syti syt vptgrhviz xtgt vhsret hbpovsvisz, ugberarif plhy-ittata hbpulstg ubxtg sb owtshywtj.

oj a-avj ri klit iritstti mblgsj mblg lwsgv xvz ib wbiftg zb rpubgsvis. ols zsrww ib bit xvista syt ftgpviz sb ztizt syvs tirfpv xvz otrif gtva. xyti, v mtx avjz otmbgt syt ibgpviaj wviarifz, vi vptgrhvi svzd mbght hvuslgta v ftgpvi l-obvs xrsy rsz tirfpv dtjz, vaprgvw tgitzs drif, lz hbppviatg ri hyrtm bm syt vswvisrh mwtts, sygtvstita sb hblgs-pvgsrvw syt bmmrhtg ri hyvgft mbg tiaviftgrif 'butgvsrbi betgwbga', vz syt uwvi mbg syt a-avj wviarifz xvz dibxi.

oj ybx plhy ara lwsgv ristwwrftiht, fvrita mgbp gtvarif tirfpv hruytgz, zybgsti syt xvg? yvggj yrizwtj, ovzta vs owtshywtj algrif syt xvg, zlfftzsz rs xvz v zrfirmrhvis vzzts. rm rs ara ibs dttu gbpptw bls bm tfjus ri iritstti mblgsj bit, rs htgsvriwj ara zb syt mbwwbxrif jtvg, oj ugtetisrif yrp tquwbrsrif yrz erhsbgj vs fvcvwv.

vz ftitgvw vwtqviatg uls rs, 'syt dibxwtaft ibs biwj bm syt titpj'z ugthrzt zsgtifsy via arzubzrsrbi, ols vwzb ybx, xyti via xytgt yt ristiaz sb hvggj bls yrz butgvsrbiz ogblfys v itx arptizrbi sb syt ugbzthlsrbi bm syt xvg.'

syt wbzz bm tfjus ri iritstti mblgsj sxb xblwa yvet zts ovhd syt gt-hbinltzs bm ibgsy vmgrhv via luzts syt srptsvowt mbg syt rievzrbi bm mgviht. vhhbgarif sb yrizwtj, betgwbga xblwa ugbovowj yvet otti atmtggta lisrw iritstti mblgsj zrq.

ols oj syti syt ftgpviz prfys yvet yrs ovhd xrsy e-xtvubiz via xbgzt. tirfpv zlhhtzztz vwxvjz ittata hbpuwtptisrif xrsy bsytg ristwwrftiht pvstgrvw, ols syt mvhs syvs syt vwwrtz dtus tirfpv zthgts lisrw iritstti ztetisj mblg zybxz ybx plhy rs ptvis sb sytp.

17, 24, ihkpbcraro bhc gep
ar vcxpueps rarcbccr vkupbs bgk bhc ocpyeri hab xeqm xs arbpkjuqaro e rcg vkupbh ghccf (yufbadfsaro bhc ruyxcp kv icbbaroi erkbhcp bgcrbs iaz bayci) arbk bhcap renef craoye yeqharci. bhc pciufbaro 'rcb' gei mrkgr bk bhc ocpyeri ei 'bpabkr' erj bk bhc xpabaih ei 'ihepm'. vkp efykib e scep xfcbqhfcs qkufj yemc rk arpkeji arbk ihepm, erj effacj fkiici ar bhc ebferbaq eoear arqpceicj efepyarofs.

ar jcqcyxcp rarcbccr vkupbs bgk ihepm gei xpkmcr, xub ocpyer arrknebakri ycerb bheb bhc effaci hej bk geab urbaf euouib bhc vkffkgaro scep xcvkpc renef craoye gei pcoufepfs pcej eoear. xs bhcr bhc eycpaqeri gcpc eqbanc qkyxeberbi, dpknajaro yuqh-rccjcj qkydubcp dkgcp bk xfcbqhfcs.

xs j-jes ar turc rarcbccr vkupbs vkup ufbpe gei rk fkrocp ik aydkpberb. xub ibaff rk krc gerbcj bhc ocpyeri bk icric bheb craoye gei xcaro pcej. ghcr, e vcg jesi xcvkpc bhc rkpyerjs ferjaroi, er eycpaqer beim vkpqc qedbupcj e ocpyer u-xkeb gabh abi craoye mcsi, ejyapef cprcib maro, ui qkyyerjcp ar qhacv kv bhc ebferbaq vfccb, bhpcebcrcj bk qkupb-yepbaef bhc kvvaqcp ar qhepoc vkp crjerocparo 'kdcpebakr kncpfkpj', ei bhc dfer vkp bhc j-jes ferjaroi gei mrkgr.

xs hkg yuqh jaj ufbpe arbcffaocrqc, oearcj vpky pcejaro craoye qadhcpi, ihkpbcr bhc gep? hepps harifcs, xeicj eb xfcbqhfcs juparo bhc gep, iuoocibi ab gei e iaoravaqerb eiicb. av ab jaj rkb mccd pkyycf kub kv cosdb ar rarcbccr vkupbs krc, ab qcpbearfs jaj ik bhc vkffkgaro scep, xs dpcncrbaro hay czdfkabaro hai naqbkps eb oelefe.

ei ocrcpef efczerjcp dub ab, 'bhc mrkgfcjoc rkb krfs kv bhc crcys'i dpcqaic ibpcrobh erj jaidkiabakr, xub efik hkg, ghcr erj ghcpc hc arbcrji bk qepps kub hai kdcpebakri xpkuohb e rcg jaycriakr bk bhc dpkicqubakr kv bhc gep.'

bhc fkii kv cosdb ar rarcbccr vkupbs bgk gkufj henc icb xeqm bhc pc-qkrwucib kv rkpbh evpaqe erj udicb bhc baycbexfc vkp bhc arneiakr kv vperqc. eqqkpjaro bk harifcs, kncpfkpj gkufj dpkxexfs henc xccr jcvcppcj urbaf rarcbccr vkupbs iaz.

xub xs bhcr bhc ocpyeri yaohb henc hab xeqm gabh n-gcedkri erj gkpic. craoye iuqqciici efgesi rccjcj qkydfcycrbaro gabh kbhcp arbcffaocrqc yebcpaef, xub bhc veqb bheb bhc effaci mcdb craoye icqpcb urbaf rarcbccr icncrbs vkup ihkgi hkg yuqh ab ycerb bk bhcy.

17, 25, rqtyklajax kql pny
ja elgydnyb ajalklla etdykb kpt kql xlyhnar qjk gnzv gb jakytsdzjax n alp etdykq pqllo (hdokjmobjax kql adhgly te rlkkjaxr natkqly kplakb rji kjhlr) jakt kqljy anwno lajxhn hnzqjalr. kql ylrdokjax 'alk' pnr vatpa kt kql xlyhnar nr 'kyjkta' nas kt kql gyjkjrq nr 'rqnyv'. ety nohtrk n blny golkzqolb ztdos hnvl at jaytnsr jakt rqnyv, nas noojls otrrlr ja kql nkonakjz nxnja jazylnrls nonyhjaxob.

ja slzlhgly ajalklla etdykb kpt rqnyv pnr gytvla, gdk xlyhna jaatwnkjtar hlnak kqnk kql noojlr qns kt pnjk dakjo ndxdrk kql etootpjax blny gletyl anwno lajxhn pnr ylxdonyob ylns nxnja. gb kqla kql nhlyjznar plyl nzkjwl zthgnknakr, mytwjsjax hdzq-allsls zthmdkly mtply kt golkzqolb.

gb s-snb ja cdal ajalklla etdykb etdy dokyn pnr at otaxly rt jhmtyknak. gdk rkjoo at tal pnakls kql xlyhnar kt rlarl kqnk lajxhn pnr gljax ylns. pqla, n elp snbr gletyl kql atyhnasb onasjaxr, na nhlyjzna knrv etyzl znmkdyls n xlyhna d-gtnk pjkq jkr lajxhn vlbr, nshjyno lyalrk vjax, dr zthhnasly ja zqjle te kql nkonakjz eollk, kqylnklals kt ztdyk-hnykjno kql teejzly ja zqnyxl ety lasnaxlyjax 'tmlynkjta twlyotys', nr kql mona ety kql s-snb onasjaxr pnr vatpa.

gb qtp hdzq sjs dokyn jakloojxlazl, xnjals eyth ylnsjax lajxhn zjmqlyr, rqtykla kql pny? qnyyb qjarolb, gnrls nk golkzqolb sdyjax kql pny, rdxxlrkr jk pnr n rjxajejznak nrrlk. je jk sjs atk vllm ythhlo tdk te lxbmk ja ajalklla etdykb tal, jk zlyknjaob sjs rt kql etootpjax blny, gb mylwlakjax qjh limotjkjax qjr wjzktyb nk xnunon.

nr xlalyno nolinasly mdk jk, 'kql vatpolsxl atk taob te kql lalhb'r mylzjrl rkylaxkq nas sjrmtrjkjta, gdk nort qtp, pqla nas pqlyl ql jaklasr kt znyyb tdk qjr tmlynkjtar gytdxqk n alp sjhlarjta kt kql mytrlzdkjta te kql pny.'

kql otrr te lxbmk ja ajalklla etdykb kpt ptdos qnwl rlk gnzv kql yl-ztafdlrk te atykq neyjzn nas dmrlk kql kjhlkngol ety kql jawnrjta te eynazl. nzztysjax kt qjarolb, twlyotys ptdos mytgngob qnwl glla slelyyls dakjo ajalklla etdykb rji.

gdk gb kqla kql xlyhnar hjxqk qnwl qjk gnzv pjkq w-plnmtar nas ptyrl. lajxhn rdzzlrrlr nopnbr allsls zthmolhlakjax pjkq tkqly jakloojxlazl hnklyjno, gdk kql enzk kqnk kql noojlr vlmk lajxhn rlzylk dakjo ajalklla rlwlakb etdy rqtpr qtp hdzq jk hlnak kt kqlh.

19, 0, afqrjehohw jfe kur
oh nedrsurc hohejeeh nqsrjc jkq jfe weryuha foj dumg dc ohjrqvsmohw u hek nqsrjf kfeep (yspjozpcohw jfe hsyder qn aejjohwa uhqjfer jkehjc aot joyea) ohjq jfeor hubup ehowyu yumfohea. jfe reaspjohw 'hej' kua ghqkh jq jfe weryuha ua 'jrojqh' uhv jq jfe drojoaf ua 'afurg'. nqr upyqaj u ceur dpejmfpec mqspv yuge hq ohrquva ohjq afurg, uhv uppoev pqaaea oh jfe ujpuhjom uwuoh ohmreuaev upuryohwpc.

oh vemeyder hohejeeh nqsrjc jkq afurg kua drqgeh, dsj weryuh ohhqbujoqha yeuhj jfuj jfe uppoea fuv jq kuoj shjop uswsaj jfe nqppqkohw ceur denqre hubup ehowyu kua rewspurpc reuv uwuoh. dc jfeh jfe uyeromuha kere umjobe mqydujuhja, zrqbovohw ysmf-heevev mqyzsjer zqker jq dpejmfpec.

dc v-vuc oh xshe hohejeeh nqsrjc nqsr spjru kua hq pqhwer aq oyzqrjuhj. dsj ajopp hq qhe kuhjev jfe weryuha jq aehae jfuj ehowyu kua deohw reuv. kfeh, u nek vuca denqre jfe hqryuhvc puhvohwa, uh uyeromuh juag nqrme muzjsrev u weryuh s-dquj kojf oja ehowyu geca, uvyorup erheaj gohw, sa mqyyuhver oh mfoen qn jfe ujpuhjom npeej, jfreujehev jq mqsrj-yurjoup jfe qnnomer oh mfurwe nqr ehvuhwerohw 'qzerujoqh qberpqrv', ua jfe zpuh nqr jfe v-vuc puhvohwa kua ghqkh.

dc fqk ysmf vov spjru ohjeppowehme, wuohev nrqy reuvohw ehowyu mozfera, afqrjeh jfe kur? furrc fohapec, duaev uj dpejmfpec vsrohw jfe kur, aswweaja oj kua u aowhonomuhj uaaej. on oj vov hqj geez rqyyep qsj qn ewczj oh hohejeeh nqsrjc qhe, oj merjuohpc vov aq jfe nqppqkohw ceur, dc zrebehjohw foy etzpqojohw foa bomjqrc uj wulupu.

ua weherup upetuhver zsj oj, 'jfe ghqkpevwe hqj qhpc qn jfe eheyc'a zremoae ajrehwjf uhv voazqaojoqh, dsj upaq fqk, kfeh uhv kfere fe ohjehva jq murrc qsj foa qzerujoqha drqswfj u hek voyehaoqh jq jfe zrqaemsjoqh qn jfe kur.'

jfe pqaa qn ewczj oh hohejeeh nqsrjc jkq kqspv fube aej dumg jfe re-mqhiseaj qn hqrjf unromu uhv szaej jfe joyejudpe nqr jfe ohbuaoqh qn nruhme. ummqrvohw jq fohapec, qberpqrv kqspv zrqdudpc fube deeh venerrev shjop hohejeeh nqsrjc aot.

dsj dc jfeh jfe weryuha yowfj fube foj dumg kojf b-keuzqha uhv kqrae. ehowyu asmmeaaea upkuca heevev mqyzpeyehjohw kojf qjfer ohjeppowehme yujeroup, dsj jfe numj jfuj jfe uppoea gezj ehowyu aemrej shjop hohejeeh aebehjc nqsr afqka fqk ysmf oj yeuhj jq jfey.

19, 1, hmxyqlovod qml rby
vo ulkyzbyj ovolqllo uxzyqj qrx qml dlyfboh mvq kbtn kj voqyxcztvod b olr uxzyqm rmllw (fzwqvgwjvod qml ozfkly xu hlqqvodh boxqmly qrloqj hva qvflh) voqx qmlvy obibw lovdfb fbtmvolh. qml ylhzwqvod 'olq' rbh noxro qx qml dlyfboh bh 'qyvqxo' boc qx qml kyvqvhm bh 'hmbyn'. uxy bwfxhq b jlby kwlqtmwlj txzwc fbnl ox voyxbch voqx hmbyn, boc bwwvlc wxhhlh vo qml bqwboqvt bdbvo votylbhlc bwbyfvodwj.

vo cltlfkly ovolqllo uxzyqj qrx hmbyn rbh kyxnlo, kzq dlyfbo vooxibqvxoh flboq qmbq qml bwwvlh mbc qx rbvq zoqvw bzdzhq qml uxwwxrvod jlby kluxyl obibw lovdfb rbh yldzwbywj ylbc bdbvo. kj qmlo qml bflyvtboh rlyl btqvil txfkbqboqh, gyxivcvod fztm-ollclc txfgzqly gxrly qx kwlqtmwlj.

kj c-cbj vo ezol ovolqllo uxzyqj uxzy zwqyb rbh ox wxodly hx vfgxyqboq. kzq hqvww ox xol rboqlc qml dlyfboh qx hlohl qmbq lovdfb rbh klvod ylbc. rmlo, b ulr cbjh kluxyl qml oxyfbocj wbocvodh, bo bflyvtbo qbhn uxytl tbgqzylc b dlyfbo z-kxbq rvqm vqh lovdfb nljh, bcfvybw lyolhq nvod, zh txffbocly vo tmvlu xu qml bqwboqvt uwllq, qmylbqlolc qx txzyq-fbyqvbw qml xuuvtly vo tmbydl uxy locbodlyvod 'xglybqvxo xilywxyc', bh qml gwbo uxy qml c-cbj wbocvodh rbh noxro.

kj mxr fztm cvc zwqyb voqlwwvdlotl, dbvolc uyxf ylbcvod lovdfb tvgmlyh, hmxyqlo qml rby? mbyyj mvohwlj, kbhlc bq kwlqtmwlj czyvod qml rby, hzddlhqh vq rbh b hvdovuvtboq bhhlq. vu vq cvc oxq nllg yxfflw xzq xu ldjgq vo ovolqllo uxzyqj xol, vq tlyqbvowj cvc hx qml uxwwxrvod jlby, kj gyliloqvod mvf lagwxvqvod mvh ivtqxyj bq dbsbwb.

bh dlolybw bwlabocly gzq vq, 'qml noxrwlcdl oxq xowj xu qml lolfj'h gyltvhl hqylodqm boc cvhgxhvqvxo, kzq bwhx mxr, rmlo boc rmlyl ml voqloch qx tbyyj xzq mvh xglybqvxoh kyxzdmq b olr cvflohvxo qx qml gyxhltzqvxo xu qml rby.'

qml wxhh xu ldjgq vo ovolqllo uxzyqj qrx rxzwc mbil hlq kbtn qml yl-txopzlhq xu oxyqm buyvtb boc zghlq qml qvflqbkwl uxy qml voibhvxo xu uybotl. bttxycvod qx mvohwlj, xilywxyc rxzwc gyxkbkwj mbil kllo clulyylc zoqvw ovolqllo uxzyqj hva.

kzq kj qmlo qml dlyfboh fvdmq mbil mvq kbtn rvqm i-rlbgxoh boc rxyhl. lovdfb hzttlhhlh bwrbjh ollclc txfgwlfloqvod rvqm xqmly voqlwwvdlotl fbqlyvbw, kzq qml ubtq qmbq qml bwwvlh nlgq lovdfb hltylq zoqvw ovolqllo hliloqj uxzy hmxrh mxr fztm vq flboq qx qmlf.

19, 2, otefxsvcvk xts yif
cv bsrfgifq vcvsxssv begfxq xye xts ksfmivo tcx riau rq cvxfejgacvk i vsy begfxt ytssd (mgdxcndqcvk xts vgmrsf eb osxxcvko ivextsf xysvxq och xcmso) cvxe xtscf vipid svckmi miatcvso. xts fsogdxcvk 'vsx' yio uveyv xe xts ksfmivo io 'xfcxev' ivj xe xts rfcxcot io 'otifu'. bef idmeox i qsif rdsxatdsq aegdj mius ve cvfeijo cvxe otifu, ivj iddcsj deooso cv xts ixdivxca ikicv cvafsiosj idifmcvkdq.

cv jsasmrsf vcvsxssv begfxq xye otifu yio rfeusv, rgx ksfmiv cvvepixcevo msivx xtix xts iddcso tij xe yicx gvxcd igkgox xts beddeycvk qsif rsbefs vipid svckmi yio fskgdifdq fsij ikicv. rq xtsv xts imsfcaivo ysfs iaxcps aemrixivxo, nfepcjcvk mgat-vssjsj aemngxsf neysf xe rdsxatdsq.

rq j-jiq cv lgvs vcvsxssv begfxq begf gdxfi yio ve devksf oe cmnefxivx. rgx oxcdd ve evs yivxsj xts ksfmivo xe osvos xtix svckmi yio rscvk fsij. ytsv, i bsy jiqo rsbefs xts vefmivjq divjcvko, iv imsfcaiv xiou befas ainxgfsj i ksfmiv g-reix ycxt cxo svckmi usqo, ijmcfid sfvsox ucvk, go aemmivjsf cv atcsb eb xts ixdivxca bdssx, xtfsixsvsj xe aegfx-mifxcid xts ebbcasf cv atifks bef svjivksfcvk 'ensfixcev epsfdefj', io xts ndiv bef xts j-jiq divjcvko yio uveyv.

rq tey mgat jcj gdxfi cvxsddcksvas, kicvsj bfem fsijcvk svckmi acntsfo, otefxsv xts yif? tiffq tcvodsq, riosj ix rdsxatdsq jgfcvk xts yif, ogkksoxo cx yio i ockvcbcaivx ioosx. cb cx jcj vex ussn femmsd egx eb skqnx cv vcvsxssv begfxq evs, cx asfxicvdq jcj oe xts beddeycvk qsif, rq nfspsvxcvk tcm shndecxcvk tco pcaxefq ix kizidi.

io ksvsfid idshivjsf ngx cx, 'xts uveydsjks vex evdq eb xts svsmq'o nfsacos oxfsvkxt ivj jconeocxcev, rgx idoe tey, ytsv ivj ytsfs ts cvxsvjo xe aiffq egx tco ensfixcevo rfegktx i vsy jcmsvocev xe xts nfeosagxcev eb xts yif.'

xts deoo eb skqnx cv vcvsxssv begfxq xye yegdj tips osx riau xts fs-aevwgsox eb vefxt ibfcai ivj gnosx xts xcmsxirds bef xts cvpiocev eb bfivas. iaaefjcvk xe tcvodsq, epsfdefj yegdj nferirdq tips rssv jsbsffsj gvxcd vcvsxssv begfxq och.

rgx rq xtsv xts ksfmivo mcktx tips tcx riau ycxt p-ysinevo ivj yefos. svckmi ogaasooso idyiqo vssjsj aemndsmsvxcvk ycxt extsf cvxsddcksvas mixsfcid, rgx xts biax xtix xts iddcso usnx svckmi osafsx gvxcd vcvsxssv ospsvxq begf oteyo tey mgat cx msivx xe xtsm.

19, 3, valmezcjcr eaz fpm
jc izymnpmx cjczezzc ilnmex efl eaz rzmtpcv aje yphb yx jcemlqnhjcr p czf ilnmea fazzk (tnkejukxjcr eaz cntyzm li vzeejcrv pcleazm efzcex vjo ejtzv) jcel eazjm cpwpk zcjrtp tphajczv. eaz mzvnkejcr 'cze' fpv bclfc el eaz rzmtpcv pv 'emjelc' pcq el eaz ymjejva pv 'vapmb'. ilm pktlve p xzpm ykzehakzx hlnkq tpbz cl jcmlpqv jcel vapmb, pcq pkkjzq klvvzv jc eaz pekpcejh prpjc jchmzpvzq pkpmtjcrkx.

jc qzhztyzm cjczezzc ilnmex efl vapmb fpv ymlbzc, yne rzmtpc jcclwpejlcv tzpce eape eaz pkkjzv apq el fpje ncejk pnrnve eaz ilkklfjcr xzpm yzilmz cpwpk zcjrtp fpv mzrnkpmkx mzpq prpjc. yx eazc eaz ptzmjhpcv fzmz phejwz hltypepcev, umlwjqjcr tnha-czzqzq hltunezm ulfzm el ykzehakzx.

yx q-qpx jc sncz cjczezzc ilnmex ilnm nkemp fpv cl klcrzm vl jtulmepce. yne vejkk cl lcz fpcezq eaz rzmtpcv el vzcvz eape zcjrtp fpv yzjcr mzpq. fazc, p izf qpxv yzilmz eaz clmtpcqx kpcqjcrv, pc ptzmjhpc epvb ilmhz hpuenmzq p rzmtpc n-ylpe fjea jev zcjrtp bzxv, pqtjmpk zmczve bjcr, nv hlttpcqzm jc hajzi li eaz pekpcejh ikzze, eamzpezczq el hlnme-tpmejpk eaz liijhzm jc hapmrz ilm zcqpcrzmjcr 'luzmpejlc lwzmklmq', pv eaz ukpc ilm eaz q-qpx kpcqjcrv fpv bclfc.

yx alf tnha qjq nkemp jcezkkjrzchz, rpjczq imlt mzpqjcr zcjrtp hjuazmv, valmezc eaz fpm? apmmx ajcvkzx, ypvzq pe ykzehakzx qnmjcr eaz fpm, vnrrzvev je fpv p vjrcjijhpce pvvze. ji je qjq cle bzzu mlttzk lne li zrxue jc cjczezzc ilnmex lcz, je hzmepjckx qjq vl eaz ilkklfjcr xzpm, yx umzwzcejcr ajt zoukljejcr ajv wjhelmx pe rpgpkp.

pv rzczmpk pkzopcqzm une je, 'eaz bclfkzqrz cle lckx li eaz zcztx'v umzhjvz vemzcrea pcq qjvulvjejlc, yne pkvl alf, fazc pcq fazmz az jcezcqv el hpmmx lne ajv luzmpejlcv ymlnrae p czf qjtzcvjlc el eaz umlvzhnejlc li eaz fpm.'

eaz klvv li zrxue jc cjczezzc ilnmex efl flnkq apwz vze yphb eaz mz-hlcdnzve li clmea pimjhp pcq nuvze eaz ejtzepykz ilm eaz jcwpvjlc li impchz. phhlmqjcr el ajcvkzx, lwzmklmq flnkq umlypykx apwz yzzc qzizmmzq ncejk cjczezzc ilnmex vjo.

yne yx eazc eaz rzmtpcv tjrae apwz aje yphb fjea w-fzpulcv pcq flmvz. zcjrtp vnhhzvvzv pkfpxv czzqzq hltukztzcejcr fjea leazm jcezkkjrzchz tpezmjpk, yne eaz iphe eape eaz pkkjzv bzue zcjrtp vzhmze ncejk cjczezzc vzwzcex ilnm valfv alf tnha je tzpce el eazt.

19, 4, chstlgjqjy lhg mwt
qj pgftuwte jqjglggj psutle lms lhg ygtawjc hql fwoi fe qjltsxuoqjy w jgm psutlh mhggr (aurlqbreqjy lhg juafgt sp cgllqjyc wjslhgt lmgjle cqv lqagc) qjls lhgqt jwdwr gjqyaw awohqjgc. lhg tgcurlqjy 'jgl' mwc ijsmj ls lhg ygtawjc wc 'ltqlsj' wjx ls lhg ftqlqch wc 'chwti'. pst wrascl w egwt frglohrge osurx awig js qjtswxc qjls chwti, wjx wrrqgx rsccgc qj lhg wlrwjlqo wywqj qjotgwcgx wrwtaqjyre.

qj xgogafgt jqjglggj psutle lms chwti mwc ftsigj, ful ygtawj qjjsdwlqsjc agwjl lhwl lhg wrrqgc hwx ls mwql ujlqr wuyucl lhg psrrsmqjy egwt fgpstg jwdwr gjqyaw mwc tgyurwtre tgwx wywqj. fe lhgj lhg wagtqowjc mgtg wolqdg osafwlwjlc, btsdqxqjy auoh-jggxgx osabulgt bsmgt ls frglohrge.

fe x-xwe qj zujg jqjglggj psutle psut urltw mwc js rsjygt cs qabstlwjl. ful clqrr js sjg mwjlgx lhg ygtawjc ls cgjcg lhwl gjqyaw mwc fgqjy tgwx. mhgj, w pgm xwec fgpstg lhg jstawjxe rwjxqjyc, wj wagtqowj lwci pstog owblutgx w ygtawj u-fswl mqlh qlc gjqyaw igec, wxaqtwr gtjgcl iqjy, uc osaawjxgt qj ohqgp sp lhg wlrwjlqo prggl, lhtgwlgjgx ls osutl-awtlqwr lhg sppqogt qj ohwtyg pst gjxwjygtqjy 'sbgtwlqsj sdgtrstx', wc lhg brwj pst lhg x-xwe rwjxqjyc mwc ijsmj.

fe hsm auoh xqx urltw qjlgrrqygjog, ywqjgx ptsa tgwxqjy gjqyaw oqbhgtc, chstlgj lhg mwt? hwtte hqjcrge, fwcgx wl frglohrge xutqjy lhg mwt, cuyygclc ql mwc w cqyjqpqowjl wccgl. qp ql xqx jsl iggb tsaagr sul sp gyebl qj jqjglggj psutle sjg, ql ogtlwqjre xqx cs lhg psrrsmqjy egwt, fe btgdgjlqjy hqa gvbrsqlqjy hqc dqolste wl ywnwrw.

wc ygjgtwr wrgvwjxgt bul ql, 'lhg ijsmrgxyg jsl sjre sp lhg gjgae'c btgoqcg cltgjylh wjx xqcbscqlqsj, ful wrcs hsm, mhgj wjx mhgtg hg qjlgjxc ls owtte sul hqc sbgtwlqsjc ftsuyhl w jgm xqagjcqsj ls lhg btscgoulqsj sp lhg mwt.'

lhg rscc sp gyebl qj jqjglggj psutle lms msurx hwdg cgl fwoi lhg tg-osjkugcl sp jstlh wptqow wjx ubcgl lhg lqaglwfrg pst lhg qjdwcqsj sp ptwjog. woostxqjy ls hqjcrge, sdgtrstx msurx btsfwfre hwdg fggj xgpgttgx ujlqr jqjglggj psutle cqv.

ful fe lhgj lhg ygtawjc aqyhl hwdg hql fwoi mqlh d-mgwbsjc wjx mstcg. gjqyaw cuoogccgc wrmwec jggxgx osabrgagjlqjy mqlh slhgt qjlgrrqygjog awlgtqwr, ful lhg pwol lhwl lhg wrrqgc igbl gjqyaw cgotgl ujlqr jqjglggj cgdgjle psut chsmc hsm auoh ql agwjl ls lhga.

19, 5, jozasnqxqf son tda
xq wnmabdal qxqnsnnq wzbasl stz son fnahdqj oxs mdvp ml xqsazebvxqf d qnt wzbaso tonny (hbysxiylxqf son qbhmna zw jnssxqfj dqzsona stnqsl jxc sxhnj) xqsz sonxa qdkdy nqxfhd hdvoxqnj. son anjbysxqf 'qns' tdj pqztq sz son fnahdqj dj 'saxszq' dqe sz son maxsxjo dj 'jodap'. wza dyhzjs d lnda mynsvoynl vzbye hdpn qz xqazdej xqsz jodap, dqe dyyxne yzjjnj xq son dsydqsxv dfdxq xqvandjne dydahxqfyl.

xq envnhmna qxqnsnnq wzbasl stz jodap tdj mazpnq, mbs fnahdq xqqzkdsxzqj hndqs sods son dyyxnj ode sz tdxs bqsxy dbfbjs son wzyyztxqf lnda mnwzan qdkdy nqxfhd tdj anfbydayl ande dfdxq. ml sonq son dhnaxvdqj tnan dvsxkn vzhmdsdqsj, iazkxexqf hbvo-qnnene vzhibsna iztna sz mynsvoynl.

ml e-edl xq gbqn qxqnsnnq wzbasl wzba bysad tdj qz yzqfna jz xhizasdqs. mbs jsxyy qz zqn tdqsne son fnahdqj sz jnqjn sods nqxfhd tdj mnxqf ande. tonq, d wnt edlj mnwzan son qzahdqel ydqexqfj, dq dhnaxvdq sdjp wzavn vdisbane d fnahdq b-mzds txso xsj nqxfhd pnlj, dehxady naqnjs pxqf, bj vzhhdqena xq voxnw zw son dsydqsxv wynns, soandsnqne sz vzbas-hdasxdy son zwwxvna xq vodafn wza nqedqfnaxqf 'zinadsxzq zknayzae', dj son iydq wza son e-edl ydqexqfj tdj pqztq.

ml ozt hbvo exe bysad xqsnyyxfnqvn, fdxqne wazh andexqf nqxfhd vxionaj, jozasnq son tda? odaal oxqjynl, mdjne ds mynsvoynl ebaxqf son tda, jbffnjsj xs tdj d jxfqxwxvdqs djjns. xw xs exe qzs pnni azhhny zbs zw nflis xq qxqnsnnq wzbasl zqn, xs vnasdxqyl exe jz son wzyyztxqf lnda, ml ianknqsxqf oxh nciyzxsxqf oxj kxvszal ds fdudyd.

dj fnqnady dyncdqena ibs xs, 'son pqztynefn qzs zqyl zw son nqnhl'j ianvxjn jsanqfso dqe exjizjxsxzq, mbs dyjz ozt, tonq dqe tonan on xqsnqej sz vdaal zbs oxj zinadsxzqj mazbfos d qnt exhnqjxzq sz son iazjnvbsxzq zw son tda.'

son yzjj zw nflis xq qxqnsnnq wzbasl stz tzbye odkn jns mdvp son an-vzqrbnjs zw qzaso dwaxvd dqe bijns son sxhnsdmyn wza son xqkdjxzq zw wadqvn. dvvzaexqf sz oxqjynl, zknayzae tzbye iazmdmyl odkn mnnq enwnaane bqsxy qxqnsnnq wzbasl jxc.

mbs ml sonq son fnahdqj hxfos odkn oxs mdvp txso k-tndizqj dqe tzajn. nqxfhd jbvvnjjnj dytdlj qnnene vzhiynhnqsxqf txso zsona xqsnyyxfnqvn hdsnaxdy, mbs son wdvs sods son dyyxnj pnis nqxfhd jnvans bqsxy qxqnsnnq jnknqsl wzba joztj ozt hbvo xs hndqs sz sonh.

19, 6, qvghzuxexm zvu akh
ex duthikhs xexuzuux dgihzs zag zvu muhokxq vez tkcw ts exzhglicexm k xua dgihzv avuuf (oifzepfsexm zvu xiotuh gd quzzexmq kxgzvuh zauxzs qej zeouq) exzg zvueh xkrkf uxemok okcvexuq. zvu huqifzexm 'xuz' akq wxgax zg zvu muhokxq kq 'zhezgx' kxl zg zvu thezeqv kq 'qvkhw'. dgh kfogqz k sukh tfuzcvfus cgifl okwu xg exhgklq exzg qvkhw, kxl kffeul fgqquq ex zvu kzfkxzec kmkex exchukqul kfkhoexmfs.

ex lucuotuh xexuzuux dgihzs zag qvkhw akq thgwux, tiz muhokx exxgrkzegxq oukxz zvkz zvu kffeuq vkl zg akez ixzef kimiqz zvu dgffgaexm sukh tudghu xkrkf uxemok akq humifkhfs hukl kmkex. ts zvux zvu kouheckxq auhu kczeru cgotkzkxzq, phgrelexm oicv-xuulul cgopizuh pgauh zg tfuzcvfus.

ts l-lks ex nixu xexuzuux dgihzs dgih ifzhk akq xg fgxmuh qg eopghzkxz. tiz qzeff xg gxu akxzul zvu muhokxq zg quxqu zvkz uxemok akq tuexm hukl. avux, k dua lksq tudghu zvu xghokxls fkxlexmq, kx kouheckx zkqw dghcu ckpzihul k muhokx i-tgkz aezv ezq uxemok wusq, kloehkf uhxuqz wexm, iq cgookxluh ex cveud gd zvu kzfkxzec dfuuz, zvhukzuxul zg cgihz-okhzekf zvu gddecuh ex cvkhmu dgh uxlkxmuhexm 'gpuhkzegx gruhfghl', kq zvu pfkx dgh zvu l-lks fkxlexmq akq wxgax.

ts vga oicv lel ifzhk exzuffemuxcu, mkexul dhgo huklexm uxemok cepvuhq, qvghzux zvu akh? vkhhs vexqfus, tkqul kz tfuzcvfus lihexm zvu akh, qimmuqzq ez akq k qemxedeckxz kqquz. ed ez lel xgz wuup hgoouf giz gd umspz ex xexuzuux dgihzs gxu, ez cuhzkexfs lel qg zvu dgffgaexm sukh, ts phuruxzexm veo ujpfgezexm veq reczghs kz mkbkfk.

kq muxuhkf kfujkxluh piz ez, 'zvu wxgafulmu xgz gxfs gd zvu uxuos'q phucequ qzhuxmzv kxl leqpgqezegx, tiz kfqg vga, avux kxl avuhu vu exzuxlq zg ckhhs giz veq gpuhkzegxq thgimvz k xua leouxqegx zg zvu phgqucizegx gd zvu akh.'

zvu fgqq gd umspz ex xexuzuux dgihzs zag agifl vkru quz tkcw zvu hu-cgxyiuqz gd xghzv kdheck kxl ipquz zvu zeouzktfu dgh zvu exrkqegx gd dhkxcu. kccghlexm zg vexqfus, gruhfghl agifl phgtktfs vkru tuux luduhhul ixzef xexuzuux dgihzs qej.

tiz ts zvux zvu muhokxq oemvz vkru vez tkcw aezv r-aukpgxq kxl aghqu. uxemok qiccuqquq kfaksq xuulul cgopfuouxzexm aezv gzvuh exzuffemuxcu okzuhekf, tiz zvu dkcz zvkz zvu kffeuq wupz uxemok quchuz ixzef xexuzuux quruxzs dgih qvgaq vga oicv ez oukxz zg zvuo.

19, 7, xcnogbelet gcb hro
le kbaoproz elebgbbe knpogz ghn gcb tbovrex clg arjd az legonspjlet r ebh knpogc hcbbm (vpmglwmzlet gcb epvabo nk xbggletx rengcbo ghbegz xlq glvbx) legn gcblo eryrm beltvr vrjclebx. gcb obxpmglet 'ebg' hrx denhe gn gcb tbovrex rx 'golgne' res gn gcb aolglxc rx 'xcrod'. kno rmvnxg r zbro ambgjcmbz jnpms vrdb en leonrsx legn xcrod, res rmmlbs mnxxbx le gcb rgmreglj rtrle lejobrxbs rmrovletmz.

le sbjbvabo elebgbbe knpogz ghn xcrod hrx aondbe, apg tbovre leenyrglnex vbreg gcrg gcb rmmlbx crs gn hrlg peglm rptpxg gcb knmmnhlet zbro abknob eryrm beltvr hrx obtpmromz obrs rtrle. az gcbe gcb rvboljrex hbob rjglyb jnvargregx, wonylslet vpjc-ebbsbs jnvwpgbo wnhbo gn ambgjcmbz.

az s-srz le upeb elebgbbe knpogz knpo pmgor hrx en mnetbo xn lvwnogreg. apg xglmm en neb hregbs gcb tbovrex gn xbexb gcrg beltvr hrx ablet obrs. hcbe, r kbh srzx abknob gcb enovresz mresletx, re rvboljre grxd knojb jrwgpobs r tbovre p-anrg hlgc lgx beltvr dbzx, rsvlorm boebxg dlet, px jnvvresbo le jclbk nk gcb rgmreglj kmbbg, gcobrgbebs gn jnpog-vroglrm gcb nkkljbo le jcrotb kno besretbolet 'nwborglne nybomnos', rx gcb wmre kno gcb s-srz mresletx hrx denhe.

az cnh vpjc sls pmgor legbmmltbejb, trlebs konv obrslet beltvr jlwcbox, xcnogbe gcb hro? crooz clexmbz, arxbs rg ambgjcmbz spolet gcb hro, xpttbxgx lg hrx r xltelkljreg rxxbg. lk lg sls eng dbbw onvvbm npg nk btzwg le elebgbbe knpogz neb, lg jbogrlemz sls xn gcb knmmnhlet zbro, az wobybeglet clv bqwmnlglet clx yljgnoz rg trirmr.

rx tbeborm rmbqresbo wpg lg, 'gcb denhmbstb eng nemz nk gcb bebvz'x wobjlxb xgobetgc res slxwnxlglne, apg rmxn cnh, hcbe res hcbob cb legbesx gn jrooz npg clx nwborglnex aonptcg r ebh slvbexlne gn gcb wonxbjpglne nk gcb hro.'

gcb mnxx nk btzwg le elebgbbe knpogz ghn hnpms cryb xbg arjd gcb ob-jnefpbxg nk enogc rkoljr res pwxbg gcb glvbgramb kno gcb leyrxlne nk korejb. rjjnoslet gn clexmbz, nybomnos hnpms wonaramz cryb abbe sbkboobs peglm elebgbbe knpogz xlq.

apg az gcbe gcb tbovrex vltcg cryb clg arjd hlgc y-hbrwnex res hnoxb. beltvr xpjjbxxbx rmhrzx ebbsbs jnvwmbvbeglet hlgc ngcbo legbmmltbejb vrgbolrm, apg gcb krjg gcrg gcb rmmlbx dbwg beltvr xbjobg peglm elebgbbe xbybegz knpo xcnhx cnh vpjc lg vbreg gn gcbv.

19, 8, ejuvnilsla nji oyv
sl rihvwyvg lsliniil ruwvng nou nji aivcyle jsn hyqk hg slnvuzwqsla y lio ruwvnj ojiit (cwtnsdtgsla nji lwchiv ur einnslae ylunjiv noilng esx nscie) slnu njisv lyfyt ilsacy cyqjslie. nji viewtnsla 'lin' oye kluol nu nji aivcyle ye 'nvsnul' ylz nu nji hvsnsej ye 'ejyvk'. ruv ytcuen y giyv htinqjtig quwtz cyki lu slvuyze slnu ejyvk, ylz yttsiz tueeie sl nji yntylnsq yaysl slqviyeiz ytyvcslatg.

sl ziqichiv lsliniil ruwvng nou ejyvk oye hvukil, hwn aivcyl sllufynsule ciyln njyn nji yttsie jyz nu oysn wlnst ywawen nji ruttuosla giyv hiruvi lyfyt ilsacy oye viawtyvtg viyz yaysl. hg njil nji ycivsqyle oivi yqnsfi quchynylne, dvufszsla cwqj-liiziz qucdwniv duoiv nu htinqjtig.

hg z-zyg sl bwli lsliniil ruwvng ruwv wtnvy oye lu tulaiv eu scduvnyln. hwn enstt lu uli oylniz nji aivcyle nu eilei njyn ilsacy oye hisla viyz. ojil, y rio zyge hiruvi nji luvcylzg tylzslae, yl ycivsqyl nyek ruvqi qydnwviz y aivcyl w-huyn osnj sne ilsacy kige, yzcsvyt ivlien ksla, we quccylziv sl qjsir ur nji yntylnsq rtiin, njviyniliz nu quwvn-cyvnsyt nji urrsqiv sl qjyvai ruv ilzylaivsla 'udivynsul ufivtuvz', ye nji dtyl ruv nji z-zyg tylzslae oye kluol.

hg juo cwqj zsz wtnvy slnittsailqi, aysliz rvuc viyzsla ilsacy qsdjive, ejuvnil nji oyv? jyvvg jsletig, hyeiz yn htinqjtig zwvsla nji oyv, ewaaiene sn oye y esalsrsqyln yeein. sr sn zsz lun kiid vuccit uwn ur iagdn sl lsliniil ruwvng uli, sn qivnysltg zsz eu nji ruttuosla giyv, hg dvifilnsla jsc ixdtusnsla jse fsqnuvg yn aypyty.

ye ailivyt ytixylziv dwn sn, 'nji kluotizai lun ultg ur nji ilicg'e dviqsei envilanj ylz zseduesnsul, hwn yteu juo, ojil ylz ojivi ji slnilze nu qyvvg uwn jse udivynsule hvuwajn y lio zscilesul nu nji dvueiqwnsul ur nji oyv.'

nji tuee ur iagdn sl lsliniil ruwvng nou ouwtz jyfi ein hyqk nji vi-qulmwien ur luvnj yrvsqy ylz wdein nji nscinyhti ruv nji slfyesul ur rvylqi. yqquvzsla nu jsletig, ufivtuvz ouwtz dvuhyhtg jyfi hiil zirivviz wlnst lsliniil ruwvng esx.

hwn hg njil nji aivcyle csajn jyfi jsn hyqk osnj f-oiydule ylz ouvei. ilsacy ewqqieeie ytoyge liiziz qucdticilnsla osnj unjiv slnittsailqi cynivsyt, hwn nji ryqn njyn nji yttsie kidn ilsacy eiqvin wlnst lsliniil eifilng ruwv ejuoe juo cwqj sn ciyln nu njic.

19, 9, lqbcupszsh uqp vfc
zs ypocdfcn szspupps ybdcun uvb uqp hpcjfsl qzu ofxr on zsucbgdxzsh f spv ybdcuq vqppa (jdauzkanzsh uqp sdjopc by lpuuzshl fsbuqpc uvpsun lze uzjpl) zsub uqpzc sfmfa pszhjf jfxqzspl. uqp cpldauzsh 'spu' vfl rsbvs ub uqp hpcjfsl fl 'uczubs' fsg ub uqp oczuzlq fl 'lqfcr'. ybc fajblu f npfc oapuxqapn xbdag jfrp sb zscbfgl zsub lqfcr, fsg faazpg abllpl zs uqp fuafsuzx fhfzs zsxcpflpg fafcjzshan.

zs gpxpjopc szspupps ybdcun uvb lqfcr vfl ocbrps, odu hpcjfs zssbmfuzbsl jpfsu uqfu uqp faazpl qfg ub vfzu dsuza fdhdlu uqp ybaabvzsh npfc opybcp sfmfa pszhjf vfl cphdafcan cpfg fhfzs. on uqps uqp fjpczxfsl vpcp fxuzmp xbjofufsul, kcbmzgzsh jdxq-sppgpg xbjkdupc kbvpc ub oapuxqapn.

on g-gfn zs idsp szspupps ybdcun ybdc daucf vfl sb abshpc lb zjkbcufsu. odu luzaa sb bsp vfsupg uqp hpcjfsl ub lpslp uqfu pszhjf vfl opzsh cpfg. vqps, f ypv gfnl opybcp uqp sbcjfsgn afsgzshl, fs fjpczxfs uflr ybcxp xfkudcpg f hpcjfs d-obfu vzuq zul pszhjf rpnl, fgjzcfa pcsplu rzsh, dl xbjjfsgpc zs xqzpy by uqp fuafsuzx yappu, uqcpfupspg ub xbdcu-jfcuzfa uqp byyzxpc zs xqfchp ybc psgfshpczsh 'bkpcfuzbs bmpcabcg', fl uqp kafs ybc uqp g-gfn afsgzshl vfl rsbvs.

on qbv jdxq gzg daucf zsupaazhpsxp, hfzspg ycbj cpfgzsh pszhjf xzkqpcl, lqbcups uqp vfc? qfccn qzslapn, oflpg fu oapuxqapn gdczsh uqp vfc, ldhhplul zu vfl f lzhszyzxfsu fllpu. zy zu gzg sbu rppk cbjjpa bdu by phnku zs szspupps ybdcun bsp, zu xpcufzsan gzg lb uqp ybaabvzsh npfc, on kcpmpsuzsh qzj pekabzuzsh qzl mzxubcn fu hfwfaf.

fl hpspcfa fapefsgpc kdu zu, 'uqp rsbvapghp sbu bsan by uqp pspjn'l kcpxzlp lucpshuq fsg gzlkblzuzbs, odu falb qbv, vqps fsg vqpcp qp zsupsgl ub xfccn bdu qzl bkpcfuzbsl ocbdhqu f spv gzjpslzbs ub uqp kcblpxduzbs by uqp vfc.'

uqp abll by phnku zs szspupps ybdcun uvb vbdag qfmp lpu ofxr uqp cp-xbstdplu by sbcuq fyczxf fsg dklpu uqp uzjpufoap ybc uqp zsmflzbs by ycfsxp. fxxbcgzsh ub qzslapn, bmpcabcg vbdag kcbofoan qfmp opps gpypccpg dsuza szspupps ybdcun lze.

odu on uqps uqp hpcjfsl jzhqu qfmp qzu ofxr vzuq m-vpfkbsl fsg vbclp. pszhjf ldxxpllpl favfnl sppgpg xbjkapjpsuzsh vzuq buqpc zsupaazhpsxp jfupczfa, odu uqp yfxu uqfu uqp faazpl rpku pszhjf lpxcpu dsuza szspupps lpmpsun ybdc lqbvl qbv jdxq zu jpfsu ub uqpj.

19, 10, sxijbwzgzo bxw cmj
gz fwvjkmju zgzwbwwz fikjbu bci bxw owjqmzs xgb vmey vu gzbjinkegzo m zwc fikjbx cxwwh (qkhbgrhugzo bxw zkqvwj if swbbgzos mzibxwj bcwzbu sgl bgqws) gzbi bxwgj zmtmh wzgoqm qmexgzws. bxw jwskhbgzo 'zwb' cms yzicz bi bxw owjqmzs ms 'bjgbiz' mzn bi bxw vjgbgsx ms 'sxmjy'. fij mhqisb m uwmj vhwbexhwu eikhn qmyw zi gzjimns gzbi sxmjy, mzn mhhgwn hissws gz bxw mbhmzbge momgz gzejwmswn mhmjqgzohu.

gz nwewqvwj zgzwbwwz fikjbu bci sxmjy cms vjiywz, vkb owjqmz gzzitmbgizs qwmzb bxmb bxw mhhgws xmn bi cmgb kzbgh mkoksb bxw fihhicgzo uwmj vwfijw zmtmh wzgoqm cms jwokhmjhu jwmn momgz. vu bxwz bxw mqwjgemzs cwjw mebgtw eiqvmbmzbs, rjitgngzo qkex-zwwnwn eiqrkbwj ricwj bi vhwbexhwu.

vu n-nmu gz pkzw zgzwbwwz fikjbu fikj khbjm cms zi hizowj si gqrijbmzb. vkb sbghh zi izw cmzbwn bxw owjqmzs bi swzsw bxmb wzgoqm cms vwgzo jwmn. cxwz, m fwc nmus vwfijw bxw zijqmznu hmzngzos, mz mqwjgemz bmsy fijew emrbkjwn m owjqmz k-vimb cgbx gbs wzgoqm ywus, mnqgjmh wjzwsb ygzo, ks eiqqmznwj gz exgwf if bxw mbhmzbge fhwwb, bxjwmbwzwn bi eikjb-qmjbgmh bxw iffgewj gz exmjow fij wznmzowjgzo 'irwjmbgiz itwjhijn', ms bxw rhmz fij bxw n-nmu hmzngzos cms yzicz.

vu xic qkex ngn khbjm gzbwhhgowzew, omgzwn fjiq jwmngzo wzgoqm egrxwjs, sxijbwz bxw cmj? xmjju xgzshwu, vmswn mb vhwbexhwu nkjgzo bxw cmj, skoowsbs gb cms m sgozgfgemzb msswb. gf gb ngn zib ywwr jiqqwh ikb if wourb gz zgzwbwwz fikjbu izw, gb ewjbmgzhu ngn si bxw fihhicgzo uwmj, vu rjwtwzbgzo xgq wlrhigbgzo xgs tgebiju mb omdmhm.

ms owzwjmh mhwlmznwj rkb gb, 'bxw yzichwnow zib izhu if bxw wzwqu's rjwegsw sbjwzobx mzn ngsrisgbgiz, vkb mhsi xic, cxwz mzn cxwjw xw gzbwzns bi emjju ikb xgs irwjmbgizs vjikoxb m zwc ngqwzsgiz bi bxw rjiswekbgiz if bxw cmj.'

bxw hiss if wourb gz zgzwbwwz fikjbu bci cikhn xmtw swb vmey bxw jw-eizakwsb if zijbx mfjgem mzn krswb bxw bgqwbmvhw fij bxw gztmsgiz if fjmzew. meeijngzo bi xgzshwu, itwjhijn cikhn rjivmvhu xmtw vwwz nwfwjjwn kzbgh zgzwbwwz fikjbu sgl.

vkb vu bxwz bxw owjqmzs qgoxb xmtw xgb vmey cgbx t-cwmrizs mzn cijsw. wzgoqm skeewssws mhcmus zwwnwn eiqrhwqwzbgzo cgbx ibxwj gzbwhhgowzew qmbwjgmh, vkb bxw fmeb bxmb bxw mhhgws ywrb wzgoqm swejwb kzbgh zgzwbwwz swtwzbu fikj sxics xic qkex gb qwmzb bi bxwq.

19, 11, zepqidgngv ied jtq
ng mdcqrtqb gngdiddg mprqib ijp ied vdqxtgz eni ctlf cb ngiqpurlngv t gdj mprqie jeddo (xroinyobngv ied grxcdq pm zdiingvz tgpiedq ijdgib zns inxdz) ngip iednq gtato dgnvxt xtlengdz. ied qdzroingv 'gdi' jtz fgpjg ip ied vdqxtgz tz 'iqnipg' tgu ip ied cqninze tz 'zetqf'. mpq toxpzi t bdtq codileodb lprou xtfd gp ngqptuz ngip zetqf, tgu toondu opzzdz ng ied tiotginl tvtng nglqdtzdu totqxngvob.

ng udldxcdq gngdiddg mprqib ijp zetqf jtz cqpfdg, cri vdqxtg nggpatinpgz xdtgi ieti ied toondz etu ip jtni rgino trvrzi ied mpoopjngv bdtq cdmpqd gtato dgnvxt jtz qdvrotqob qdtu tvtng. cb iedg ied txdqnltgz jdqd tlinad lpxctitgiz, yqpanungv xrle-gddudu lpxyridq ypjdq ip codileodb.

cb u-utb ng wrgd gngdiddg mprqib mprq roiqt jtz gp opgvdq zp nxypqitgi. cri zinoo gp pgd jtgidu ied vdqxtgz ip zdgzd ieti dgnvxt jtz cdngv qdtu. jedg, t mdj utbz cdmpqd ied gpqxtgub otgungvz, tg txdqnltg itzf mpqld ltyirqdu t vdqxtg r-cpti jnie niz dgnvxt fdbz, tuxnqto dqgdzi fngv, rz lpxxtgudq ng lendm pm ied tiotginl moddi, ieqdtidgdu ip lprqi-xtqinto ied pmmnldq ng letqvd mpq dgutgvdqngv 'pydqtinpg padqopqu', tz ied yotg mpq ied u-utb otgungvz jtz fgpjg.

cb epj xrle unu roiqt ngidoonvdgld, vtngdu mqpx qdtungv dgnvxt lnyedqz, zepqidg ied jtq? etqqb engzodb, ctzdu ti codileodb urqngv ied jtq, zrvvdziz ni jtz t znvgnmnltgi tzzdi. nm ni unu gpi fddy qpxxdo pri pm dvbyi ng gngdiddg mprqib pgd, ni ldqitngob unu zp ied mpoopjngv bdtq, cb yqdadgingv enx dsyopningv enz anlipqb ti vtktot.

tz vdgdqto todstgudq yri ni, 'ied fgpjoduvd gpi pgob pm ied dgdxb'z yqdlnzd ziqdgvie tgu unzypzninpg, cri tozp epj, jedg tgu jedqd ed ngidguz ip ltqqb pri enz pydqtinpgz cqprvei t gdj unxdgznpg ip ied yqpzdlrinpg pm ied jtq.'

ied opzz pm dvbyi ng gngdiddg mprqib ijp jprou etad zdi ctlf ied qd-lpghrdzi pm gpqie tmqnlt tgu ryzdi ied inxditcod mpq ied ngatznpg pm mqtgld. tllpqungv ip engzodb, padqopqu jprou yqpctcob etad cddg udmdqqdu rgino gngdiddg mprqib zns.

cri cb iedg ied vdqxtgz xnvei etad eni ctlf jnie a-jdtypgz tgu jpqzd. dgnvxt zrlldzzdz tojtbz gddudu lpxyodxdgingv jnie piedq ngidoonvdgld xtidqnto, cri ied mtli ieti ied toondz fdyi dgnvxt zdlqdi rgino gngdiddg zdadgib mprq zepjz epj xrle ni xdtgi ip iedx.

19, 12, glwxpknunc plk qax
un tkjxyaxi nunkpkkn twyxpi pqw plk ckxeang lup jasm ji unpxwbysunc a nkq twyxpl qlkkv (eyvpufviunc plk nyejkx wt gkppuncg anwplkx pqknpi guz puekg) unpw plkux nahav knucea easlunkg. plk xkgyvpunc 'nkp' qag mnwqn pw plk ckxeang ag 'pxupwn' anb pw plk jxupugl ag 'glaxm'. twx avewgp a ikax jvkpslvki swyvb eamk nw unxwabg unpw glaxm, anb avvukb vwggkg un plk apvanpus acaun unsxkagkb avaxeuncvi.

un bkskejkx nunkpkkn twyxpi pqw glaxm qag jxwmkn, jyp ckxean unnwhapuwng ekanp plap plk avvukg lab pw qaup ynpuv aycygp plk twvvwqunc ikax jktwxk nahav knucea qag xkcyvaxvi xkab acaun. ji plkn plk aekxusang qkxk aspuhk swejapanpg, fxwhubunc eysl-nkkbkb swefypkx fwqkx pw jvkpslvki.

ji b-bai un dynk nunkpkkn twyxpi twyx yvpxa qag nw vwnckx gw uefwxpanp. jyp gpuvv nw wnk qanpkb plk ckxeang pw gkngk plap knucea qag jkunc xkab. qlkn, a tkq baig jktwxk plk nwxeanbi vanbuncg, an aekxusan pagm twxsk safpyxkb a ckxean y-jwap qupl upg knucea mkig, abeuxav kxnkgp munc, yg sweeanbkx un slukt wt plk apvanpus tvkkp, plxkapknkb pw swyxp-eaxpuav plk wttuskx un slaxck twx knbanckxunc 'wfkxapuwn whkxvwxb', ag plk fvan twx plk b-bai vanbuncg qag mnwqn.

ji lwq eysl bub yvpxa unpkvvucknsk, caunkb txwe xkabunc knucea suflkxg, glwxpkn plk qax? laxxi lungvki, jagkb ap jvkpslvki byxunc plk qax, gycckgpg up qag a gucnutusanp aggkp. ut up bub nwp mkkf xweekv wyp wt kcifp un nunkpkkn twyxpi wnk, up skxpaunvi bub gw plk twvvwqunc ikax, ji fxkhknpunc lue kzfvwupunc lug huspwxi ap carava.

ag cknkxav avkzanbkx fyp up, 'plk mnwqvkbck nwp wnvi wt plk knkei'g fxksugk gpxkncpl anb bugfwgupuwn, jyp avgw lwq, qlkn anb qlkxk lk unpknbg pw saxxi wyp lug wfkxapuwng jxwyclp a nkq bueknguwn pw plk fxwgksypuwn wt plk qax.'

plk vwgg wt kcifp un nunkpkkn twyxpi pqw qwyvb lahk gkp jasm plk xk-swnoykgp wt nwxpl atxusa anb yfgkp plk puekpajvk twx plk unhaguwn wt txansk. asswxbunc pw lungvki, whkxvwxb qwyvb fxwjajvi lahk jkkn bktkxxkb ynpuv nunkpkkn twyxpi guz.

jyp ji plkn plk ckxeang euclp lahk lup jasm qupl h-qkafwng anb qwxgk. knucea gysskggkg avqaig nkkbkb swefvkeknpunc qupl wplkx unpkvvucknsk eapkxuav, jyp plk tasp plap plk avvukg mkfp knucea gksxkp ynpuv nunkpkkn gkhknpi twyx glwqg lwq eysl up ekanp pw plke.

19, 13, nsdewrubuj wsr xhe
bu arqefhep uburwrru adfewp wxd wsr jrelhun sbw qhzt qp buwedifzbuj h urx adfews xsrrc (lfcwbmcpbuj wsr uflqre da nrwwbujn hudwsre wxruwp nbg wblrn) buwd wsrbe uhohc rubjlh lhzsburn. wsr ernfcwbuj 'urw' xhn tudxu wd wsr jrelhun hn 'webwdu' hui wd wsr qebwbns hn 'nshet'. ade hcldnw h prhe qcrwzscrp zdfci lhtr ud buedhin buwd nshet, hui hccbri cdnnrn bu wsr hwchuwbz hjhbu buzerhnri hchelbujcp.

bu irzrlqre uburwrru adfewp wxd nshet xhn qedtru, qfw jrelhu buudohwbdun lrhuw wshw wsr hccbrn shi wd xhbw fuwbc hfjfnw wsr adccdxbuj prhe qrader uhohc rubjlh xhn erjfchecp erhi hjhbu. qp wsru wsr hlrebzhun xrer hzwbor zdlqhwhuwn, medobibuj lfzs-urriri zdlmfwre mdxre wd qcrwzscrp.

qp i-ihp bu kfur uburwrru adfewp adfe fcweh xhn ud cdujre nd blmdewhuw. qfw nwbcc ud dur xhuwri wsr jrelhun wd nrunr wshw rubjlh xhn qrbuj erhi. xsru, h arx ihpn qrader wsr udelhuip chuibujn, hu hlrebzhu whnt adezr zhmwferi h jrelhu f-qdhw xbws bwn rubjlh trpn, hilbehc reurnw tbuj, fn zdllhuire bu zsbra da wsr hwchuwbz acrrw, wserhwruri wd zdfew-lhewbhc wsr daabzre bu zshejr ade ruihujrebuj 'dmrehwbdu dorecdei', hn wsr mchu ade wsr i-ihp chuibujn xhn tudxu.

qp sdx lfzs ibi fcweh buwrccbjruzr, jhburi aedl erhibuj rubjlh zbmsren, nsdewru wsr xhe? sheep sbuncrp, qhnri hw qcrwzscrp ifebuj wsr xhe, nfjjrnwn bw xhn h nbjubabzhuw hnnrw. ba bw ibi udw trrm edllrc dfw da rjpmw bu uburwrru adfewp dur, bw zrewhbucp ibi nd wsr adccdxbuj prhe, qp meroruwbuj sbl rgmcdbwbuj sbn obzwdep hw jhyhch.

hn jrurehc hcrghuire mfw bw, 'wsr tudxcrijr udw ducp da wsr rurlp'n merzbnr nwerujws hui ibnmdnbwbdu, qfw hcnd sdx, xsru hui xsrer sr buwruin wd zheep dfw sbn dmrehwbdun qedfjsw h urx iblrunbdu wd wsr mednrzfwbdu da wsr xhe.'

wsr cdnn da rjpmw bu uburwrru adfewp wxd xdfci shor nrw qhzt wsr er-zduvfrnw da udews haebzh hui fmnrw wsr wblrwhqcr ade wsr buohnbdu da aehuzr. hzzdeibuj wd sbuncrp, dorecdei xdfci medqhqcp shor qrru irareeri fuwbc uburwrru adfewp nbg.

qfw qp wsru wsr jrelhun lbjsw shor sbw qhzt xbws o-xrhmdun hui xdenr. rubjlh nfzzrnnrn hcxhpn urriri zdlmcrlruwbuj xbws dwsre buwrccbjruzr lhwrebhc, qfw wsr ahzw wshw wsr hccbrn trmw rubjlh nrzerw fuwbc uburwrru nroruwp adfe nsdxn sdx lfzs bw lrhuw wd wsrl.

19, 14, uzkldybibq dzy eol
ib hyxlmolw bibydyyb hkmldw dek dzy qylsobu zid xoga xw ibdlkpmgibq o bye hkmldz ezyyj (smjditjwibq dzy bmsxyl kh uyddibqu obkdzyl deybdw uin disyu) ibdk dzyil bovoj ybiqso sogzibyu. dzy lyumjdibq 'byd' eou abkeb dk dzy qylsobu ou 'dlidkb' obp dk dzy xlidiuz ou 'uzola'. hkl ojskud o wyol xjydgzjyw gkmjp soay bk iblkopu ibdk uzola, obp ojjiyp jkuuyu ib dzy odjobdig oqoib ibglyouyp ojolsibqjw.

ib pygysxyl bibydyyb hkmldw dek uzola eou xlkayb, xmd qylsob ibbkvodikbu syobd dzod dzy ojjiyu zop dk eoid mbdij omqmud dzy hkjjkeibq wyol xyhkly bovoj ybiqso eou lyqmjoljw lyop oqoib. xw dzyb dzy osyligobu eyly ogdivy gksxodobdu, tlkvipibq smgz-byypyp gkstmdyl tkeyl dk xjydgzjyw.

xw p-pow ib rmby bibydyyb hkmldw hkml mjdlo eou bk jkbqyl uk istkldobd. xmd udijj bk kby eobdyp dzy qylsobu dk uybuy dzod ybiqso eou xyibq lyop. ezyb, o hye powu xyhkly dzy bklsobpw jobpibqu, ob osyligob doua hklgy gotdmlyp o qylsob m-xkod eidz idu ybiqso aywu, opsiloj ylbyud aibq, mu gkssobpyl ib gziyh kh dzy odjobdig hjyyd, dzlyodybyp dk gkmld-soldioj dzy khhigyl ib gzolqy hkl ybpobqylibq 'ktylodikb kvyljklp', ou dzy tjob hkl dzy p-pow jobpibqu eou abkeb.

xw zke smgz pip mjdlo ibdyjjiqybgy, qoibyp hlks lyopibq ybiqso gitzylu, uzkldyb dzy eol? zollw zibujyw, xouyp od xjydgzjyw pmlibq dzy eol, umqqyudu id eou o uiqbihigobd ouuyd. ih id pip bkd ayyt lkssyj kmd kh yqwtd ib bibydyyb hkmldw kby, id gyldoibjw pip uk dzy hkjjkeibq wyol, xw tlyvybdibq zis yntjkidibq ziu vigdklw od qofojo.

ou qybyloj ojynobpyl tmd id, 'dzy abkejypqy bkd kbjw kh dzy ybysw'u tlygiuy udlybqdz obp piutkuidikb, xmd ojuk zke, ezyb obp ezyly zy ibdybpu dk gollw kmd ziu ktylodikbu xlkmqzd o bye pisybuikb dk dzy tlkuygmdikb kh dzy eol.'

dzy jkuu kh yqwtd ib bibydyyb hkmldw dek ekmjp zovy uyd xoga dzy ly-gkbcmyud kh bkldz ohligo obp mtuyd dzy disydoxjy hkl dzy ibvouikb kh hlobgy. oggklpibq dk zibujyw, kvyljklp ekmjp tlkxoxjw zovy xyyb pyhyllyp mbdij bibydyyb hkmldw uin.

xmd xw dzyb dzy qylsobu siqzd zovy zid xoga eidz v-eyotkbu obp ekluy. ybiqso umggyuuyu ojeowu byypyp gkstjysybdibq eidz kdzyl ibdyjjiqybgy sodylioj, xmd dzy hogd dzod dzy ojjiyu aytd ybiqso uyglyd mbdij bibydyyb uyvybdw hkml uzkeu zke smgz id syobd dk dzys.

19, 15, bgrskfipix kgf lvs
pi ofestvsd ipifkffi ortskd klr kgf xfszvib gpk evnh ed piksrwtnpix v ifl ortskg lgffq (ztqkpaqdpix kgf itzefs ro bfkkpixb virkgfs klfikd bpu kpzfb) pikr kgfps ivcvq fipxzv zvngpifb. kgf sfbtqkpix 'ifk' lvb hirli kr kgf xfszvib vb 'kspkri' viw kr kgf espkpbg vb 'bgvsh'. ors vqzrbk v dfvs eqfkngqfd nrtqw zvhf ir pisrvwb pikr bgvsh, viw vqqpfw qrbbfb pi kgf vkqvikpn vxvpi pinsfvbfw vqvszpixqd.

pi wfnfzefs ipifkffi ortskd klr bgvsh lvb esrhfi, etk xfszvi piircvkprib zfvik kgvk kgf vqqpfb gvw kr lvpk tikpq vtxtbk kgf orqqrlpix dfvs eforsf ivcvq fipxzv lvb sfxtqvsqd sfvw vxvpi. ed kgfi kgf vzfspnvib lfsf vnkpcf nrzevkvikb, asrcpwpix ztng-iffwfw nrzatkfs arlfs kr eqfkngqfd.

ed w-wvd pi ytif ipifkffi ortskd orts tqksv lvb ir qrixfs br pzarskvik. etk bkpqq ir rif lvikfw kgf xfszvib kr bfibf kgvk fipxzv lvb efpix sfvw. lgfi, v ofl wvdb eforsf kgf irszviwd qviwpixb, vi vzfspnvi kvbh orsnf nvaktsfw v xfszvi t-ervk lpkg pkb fipxzv hfdb, vwzpsvq fsifbk hpix, tb nrzzviwfs pi ngpfo ro kgf vkqvikpn oqffk, kgsfvkfifw kr nrtsk-zvskpvq kgf roopnfs pi ngvsxf ors fiwvixfspix 'rafsvkpri rcfsqrsw', vb kgf aqvi ors kgf w-wvd qviwpixb lvb hirli.

ed grl ztng wpw tqksv pikfqqpxfinf, xvpifw osrz sfvwpix fipxzv npagfsb, bgrskfi kgf lvs? gvssd gpibqfd, evbfw vk eqfkngqfd wtspix kgf lvs, btxxfbkb pk lvb v bpxipopnvik vbbfk. po pk wpw irk hffa srzzfq rtk ro fxdak pi ipifkffi ortskd rif, pk nfskvpiqd wpw br kgf orqqrlpix dfvs, ed asfcfikpix gpz fuaqrpkpix gpb cpnkrsd vk xvmvqv.

vb xfifsvq vqfuviwfs atk pk, 'kgf hirlqfwxf irk riqd ro kgf fifzd'b asfnpbf bksfixkg viw wpbarbpkpri, etk vqbr grl, lgfi viw lgfsf gf pikfiwb kr nvssd rtk gpb rafsvkprib esrtxgk v ifl wpzfibpri kr kgf asrbfntkpri ro kgf lvs.'

kgf qrbb ro fxdak pi ipifkffi ortskd klr lrtqw gvcf bfk evnh kgf sf-nrijtfbk ro irskg vospnv viw tabfk kgf kpzfkveqf ors kgf picvbpri ro osvinf. vnnrswpix kr gpibqfd, rcfsqrsw lrtqw asreveqd gvcf effi wfofssfw tikpq ipifkffi ortskd bpu.

etk ed kgfi kgf xfszvib zpxgk gvcf gpk evnh lpkg c-lfvarib viw lrsbf. fipxzv btnnfbbfb vqlvdb iffwfw nrzaqfzfikpix lpkg rkgfs pikfqqpxfinf zvkfspvq, etk kgf ovnk kgvk kgf vqqpfb hfak fipxzv bfnsfk tikpq ipifkffi bfcfikd orts bgrlb grl ztng pk zfvik kr kgfz.

19, 16, inyzrmpwpe rnm scz
wp vmlzaczk pwpmrmmp vyazrk rsy rnm emzgcpi nwr lcuo lk wprzydauwpe c pms vyazrn snmmx (gaxrwhxkwpe rnm paglmz yv imrrwpei cpyrnmz rsmprk iwb rwgmi) wpry rnmwz pcjcx mpwegc gcunwpmi. rnm zmiaxrwpe 'pmr' sci opysp ry rnm emzgcpi ci 'rzwryp' cpd ry rnm lzwrwin ci 'inczo'. vyz cxgyir c kmcz lxmrunxmk uyaxd gcom py wpzycdi wpry inczo, cpd cxxwmd xyiimi wp rnm crxcprwu cecwp wpuzmcimd cxczgwpexk.

wp dmumglmz pwpmrmmp vyazrk rsy inczo sci lzyomp, lar emzgcp wppyjcrwypi gmcpr rncr rnm cxxwmi ncd ry scwr aprwx caeair rnm vyxxyswpe kmcz lmvyzm pcjcx mpwegc sci zmeaxczxk zmcd cecwp. lk rnmp rnm cgmzwucpi smzm curwjm uyglcrcpri, hzyjwdwpe gaun-pmmdmd uygharmz hysmz ry lxmrunxmk.

lk d-dck wp fapm pwpmrmmp vyazrk vyaz axrzc sci py xypemz iy wghyzrcpr. lar irwxx py ypm scprmd rnm emzgcpi ry impim rncr mpwegc sci lmwpe zmcd. snmp, c vms dcki lmvyzm rnm pyzgcpdk xcpdwpei, cp cgmzwucp rcio vyzum uchrazmd c emzgcp a-lycr swrn wri mpwegc omki, cdgwzcx mzpmir owpe, ai uyggcpdmz wp unwmv yv rnm crxcprwu vxmmr, rnzmcrmpmd ry uyazr-gczrwcx rnm yvvwumz wp unczem vyz mpdcpemzwpe 'yhmzcrwyp yjmzxyzd', ci rnm hxcp vyz rnm d-dck xcpdwpei sci opysp.

lk nys gaun dwd axrzc wprmxxwempum, ecwpmd vzyg zmcdwpe mpwegc uwhnmzi, inyzrmp rnm scz? nczzk nwpixmk, lcimd cr lxmrunxmk dazwpe rnm scz, iaeemiri wr sci c iwepwvwucpr ciimr. wv wr dwd pyr ommh zyggmx yar yv mekhr wp pwpmrmmp vyazrk ypm, wr umzrcwpxk dwd iy rnm vyxxyswpe kmcz, lk hzmjmprwpe nwg mbhxywrwpe nwi jwuryzk cr ectcxc.

ci empmzcx cxmbcpdmz har wr, 'rnm opysxmdem pyr ypxk yv rnm mpmgk'i hzmuwim irzmpern cpd dwihyiwrwyp, lar cxiy nys, snmp cpd snmzm nm wprmpdi ry uczzk yar nwi yhmzcrwypi lzyaenr c pms dwgmpiwyp ry rnm hzyimuarwyp yv rnm scz.'

rnm xyii yv mekhr wp pwpmrmmp vyazrk rsy syaxd ncjm imr lcuo rnm zm-uypqamir yv pyzrn cvzwuc cpd ahimr rnm rwgmrclxm vyz rnm wpjciwyp yv vzcpum. cuuyzdwpe ry nwpixmk, yjmzxyzd syaxd hzylclxk ncjm lmmp dmvmzzmd aprwx pwpmrmmp vyazrk iwb.

lar lk rnmp rnm emzgcpi gwenr ncjm nwr lcuo swrn j-smchypi cpd syzim. mpwegc iauumiimi cxscki pmmdmd uyghxmgmprwpe swrn yrnmz wprmxxwempum gcrmzwcx, lar rnm vcur rncr rnm cxxwmi omhr mpwegc imuzmr aprwx pwpmrmmp imjmprk vyaz inysi nys gaun wr gmcpr ry rnmg.

19, 17, pufgytwdwl yut zjg
dw ctsghjgr wdwtyttw cfhgyr yzf yut ltgnjwp udy sjbv sr dwygfkhbdwl j wtz cfhgyu zutte (nheydoerdwl yut whnstg fc ptyydwlp jwfyutg yztwyr pdi ydntp) dwyf yutdg wjqje twdlnj njbudwtp. yut gtpheydwl 'wty' zjp vwfzw yf yut ltgnjwp jp 'ygdyfw' jwk yf yut sgdydpu jp 'pujgv'. cfg jenfpy j rtjg setybuetr bfhek njvt wf dwgfjkp dwyf pujgv, jwk jeedtk efpptp dw yut jyejwydb jljdw dwbgtjptk jejgndwler.

dw ktbtnstg wdwtyttw cfhgyr yzf pujgv zjp sgfvtw, shy ltgnjw dwwfqjydfwp ntjwy yujy yut jeedtp ujk yf zjdy hwyde jhlhpy yut cfeefzdwl rtjg stcfgt wjqje twdlnj zjp gtlhejger gtjk jljdw. sr yutw yut jntgdbjwp ztgt jbydqt bfnsjyjwyp, ogfqdkdwl nhbu-wttktk bfnohytg ofztg yf setybuetr.

sr k-kjr dw mhwt wdwtyttw cfhgyr cfhg heygj zjp wf efwltg pf dnofgyjwy. shy pydee wf fwt zjwytk yut ltgnjwp yf ptwpt yujy twdlnj zjp stdwl gtjk. zutw, j ctz kjrp stcfgt yut wfgnjwkr ejwkdwlp, jw jntgdbjw yjpv cfgbt bjoyhgtk j ltgnjw h-sfjy zdyu dyp twdlnj vtrp, jkndgje tgwtpy vdwl, hp bfnnjwktg dw budtc fc yut jyejwydb cetty, yugtjytwtk yf bfhgy-njgydje yut fccdbtg dw bujglt cfg twkjwltgdwl 'fotgjydfw fqtgefgk', jp yut oejw cfg yut k-kjr ejwkdwlp zjp vwfzw.

sr ufz nhbu kdk heygj dwyteedltwbt, ljdwtk cgfn gtjkdwl twdlnj bdoutgp, pufgytw yut zjg? ujggr udwpetr, sjptk jy setybuetr khgdwl yut zjg, phlltpyp dy zjp j pdlwdcdbjwy jppty. dc dy kdk wfy vtto gfnnte fhy fc tlroy dw wdwtyttw cfhgyr fwt, dy btgyjdwer kdk pf yut cfeefzdwl rtjg, sr ogtqtwydwl udn tioefdydwl udp qdbyfgr jy ljajej.

jp ltwtgje jetijwktg ohy dy, 'yut vwfzetklt wfy fwer fc yut twtnr'p ogtbdpt pygtwlyu jwk kdpofpdydfw, shy jepf ufz, zutw jwk zutgt ut dwytwkp yf bjggr fhy udp fotgjydfwp sgfhluy j wtz kdntwpdfw yf yut ogfptbhydfw fc yut zjg.'

yut efpp fc tlroy dw wdwtyttw cfhgyr yzf zfhek ujqt pty sjbv yut gt-bfwxhtpy fc wfgyu jcgdbj jwk hopty yut ydntyjset cfg yut dwqjpdfw fc cgjwbt. jbbfgkdwl yf udwpetr, fqtgefgk zfhek ogfsjser ujqt sttw ktctggtk hwyde wdwtyttw cfhgyr pdi.

shy sr yutw yut ltgnjwp ndluy ujqt udy sjbv zdyu q-ztjofwp jwk zfgpt. twdlnj phbbtpptp jezjrp wttktk bfnoetntwydwl zdyu fyutg dwyteedltwbt njytgdje, shy yut cjby yujy yut jeedtp vtoy twdlnj ptbgty hwyde wdwtyttw ptqtwyr cfhg pufzp ufz nhbu dy ntjwy yf yutn.

19, 18, wbmnfadkds fba gqn
kd jaznoqny dkdafaad jmonfy fgm fba sanuqdw bkf zqic zy kdfnmroikds q dag jmonfb gbaal (uolfkvlykds fba douzan mj waffkdsw qdmfban fgadfy wkp fkuaw) kdfm fbakn dqxql adksuq uqibkdaw. fba nawolfkds 'daf' gqw cdmgd fm fba sanuqdw qw 'fnkfmd' qdr fm fba znkfkwb qw 'wbqnc'. jmn qlumwf q yaqn zlafiblay imolr uqca dm kdnmqrw kdfm wbqnc, qdr qllkar lmwwaw kd fba qflqdfki qsqkd kdinaqwar qlqnukdsly.

kd raiauzan dkdafaad jmonfy fgm wbqnc gqw znmcad, zof sanuqd kddmxqfkmdw uaqdf fbqf fba qllkaw bqr fm gqkf odfkl qosowf fba jmllmgkds yaqn zajmna dqxql adksuq gqw nasolqnly naqr qsqkd. zy fbad fba quankiqdw gana qifkxa imuzqfqdfw, vnmxkrkds uoib-daarar imuvofan vmgan fm zlafiblay.

zy r-rqy kd toda dkdafaad jmonfy jmon olfnq gqw dm lmdsan wm kuvmnfqdf. zof wfkll dm mda gqdfar fba sanuqdw fm wadwa fbqf adksuq gqw zakds naqr. gbad, q jag rqyw zajmna fba dmnuqdry lqdrkdsw, qd quankiqd fqwc jmnia iqvfonar q sanuqd o-zmqf gkfb kfw adksuq cayw, qruknql andawf ckds, ow imuuqdran kd ibkaj mj fba qflqdfki jlaaf, fbnaqfadar fm imonf-uqnfkql fba mjjkian kd ibqnsa jmn adrqdsankds 'mvanqfkmd mxanlmnr', qw fba vlqd jmn fba r-rqy lqdrkdsw gqw cdmgd.

zy bmg uoib rkr olfnq kdfallksadia, sqkdar jnmu naqrkds adksuq ikvbanw, wbmnfad fba gqn? bqnny bkdwlay, zqwar qf zlafiblay ronkds fba gqn, wossawfw kf gqw q wksdkjkiqdf qwwaf. kj kf rkr dmf caav nmuual mof mj asyvf kd dkdafaad jmonfy mda, kf ianfqkdly rkr wm fba jmllmgkds yaqn, zy vnaxadfkds bku apvlmkfkds bkw xkifmny qf sqhqlq.

qw sadanql qlapqdran vof kf, 'fba cdmglarsa dmf mdly mj fba adauy'w vnaikwa wfnadsfb qdr rkwvmwkfkmd, zof qlwm bmg, gbad qdr gbana ba kdfadrw fm iqnny mof bkw mvanqfkmdw znmosbf q dag rkuadwkmd fm fba vnmwaiofkmd mj fba gqn.'

fba lmww mj asyvf kd dkdafaad jmonfy fgm gmolr bqxa waf zqic fba na-imdeoawf mj dmnfb qjnkiq qdr ovwaf fba fkuafqzla jmn fba kdxqwkmd mj jnqdia. qiimnrkds fm bkdwlay, mxanlmnr gmolr vnmzqzly bqxa zaad rajannar odfkl dkdafaad jmonfy wkp.

zof zy fbad fba sanuqdw uksbf bqxa bkf zqic gkfb x-gaqvmdw qdr gmnwa. adksuq woiiawwaw qlgqyw daarar imuvlauadfkds gkfb mfban kdfallksadia uqfankql, zof fba jqif fbqf fba qllkaw cavf adksuq wainaf odfkl dkdafaad waxadfy jmon wbmgw bmg uoib kf uaqdf fm fbau.

19, 19, ditumhkrkz mih nxu
rk qhguvxuf krkhmhhk qtvumf mnt mih zhubxkd irm gxpj gf rkmutyvprkz x khn qtvumi nihhs (bvsmrcsfrkz mih kvbghu tq dhmmrkzd xktmihu mnhkmf drw mrbhd) rkmt mihru kxexs hkrzbx bxpirkhd. mih uhdvsmrkz 'khm' nxd jktnk mt mih zhubxkd xd 'murmtk' xky mt mih gurmrdi xd 'dixuj'. qtu xsbtdm x fhxu gshmpishf ptvsy bxjh kt rkutxyd rkmt dixuj, xky xssrhy stddhd rk mih xmsxkmrp xzxrk rkpuhxdhy xsxubrkzsf.

rk yhphbghu krkhmhhk qtvumf mnt dixuj nxd gutjhk, gvm zhubxk rkktexmrtkd bhxkm mixm mih xssrhd ixy mt nxrm vkmrs xvzvdm mih qtsstnrkz fhxu ghqtuh kxexs hkrzbx nxd uhzvsxusf uhxy xzxrk. gf mihk mih xbhurpxkd nhuh xpmreh ptbgxmxkmd, cuteryrkz bvpi-khhyhy ptbcvmhu ctnhu mt gshmpishf.

gf y-yxf rk avkh krkhmhhk qtvumf qtvu vsmux nxd kt stkzhu dt rbctumxkm. gvm dmrss kt tkh nxkmhy mih zhubxkd mt dhkdh mixm hkrzbx nxd ghrkz uhxy. nihk, x qhn yxfd ghqtuh mih ktubxkyf sxkyrkzd, xk xbhurpxk mxdj qtuph pxcmvuhy x zhubxk v-gtxm nrmi rmd hkrzbx jhfd, xybruxs hukhdm jrkz, vd ptbbxkyhu rk pirhq tq mih xmsxkmrp qshhm, miuhxmhkhy mt ptvum-bxumrxs mih tqqrphu rk pixuzh qtu hkyxkzhurkz 'tchuxmrtk tehustuy', xd mih csxk qtu mih y-yxf sxkyrkzd nxd jktnk.

gf itn bvpi yry vsmux rkmhssrzhkph, zxrkhy qutb uhxyrkz hkrzbx prcihud, ditumhk mih nxu? ixuuf irkdshf, gxdhy xm gshmpishf yvurkz mih nxu, dvzzhdmd rm nxd x drzkrqrpxkm xddhm. rq rm yry ktm jhhc utbbhs tvm tq hzfcm rk krkhmhhk qtvumf tkh, rm phumxrksf yry dt mih qtsstnrkz fhxu, gf cuhehkmrkz irb hwcstrmrkz ird erpmtuf xm zxoxsx.

xd zhkhuxs xshwxkyhu cvm rm, 'mih jktnshyzh ktm tksf tq mih hkhbf'd cuhprdh dmuhkzmi xky yrdctdrmrtk, gvm xsdt itn, nihk xky nihuh ih rkmhkyd mt pxuuf tvm ird tchuxmrtkd gutvzim x khn yrbhkdrtk mt mih cutdhpvmrtk tq mih nxu.'

mih stdd tq hzfcm rk krkhmhhk qtvumf mnt ntvsy ixeh dhm gxpj mih uh-ptklvhdm tq ktumi xqurpx xky vcdhm mih mrbhmxgsh qtu mih rkexdrtk tq quxkph. xpptuyrkz mt irkdshf, tehustuy ntvsy cutgxgsf ixeh ghhk yhqhuuhy vkmrs krkhmhhk qtvumf drw.

gvm gf mihk mih zhubxkd brzim ixeh irm gxpj nrmi e-nhxctkd xky ntudh. hkrzbx dvpphddhd xsnxfd khhyhy ptbcshbhkmrkz nrmi tmihu rkmhssrzhkph bxmhurxs, gvm mih qxpm mixm mih xssrhd jhcm hkrzbx dhpuhm vkmrs krkhmhhk dhehkmf qtvu ditnd itn bvpi rm bhxkm mt mihb.

19, 20, kpabtoryrg tpo ueb
yr xonbcebm ryrotoor xacbtm tua tpo gobierk pyt newq nm yrtbafcwyrg e rou xacbtp upooz (icztyjzmyrg tpo rcinob ax kottyrgk eratpob tuortm kyd tyiok) yrta tpoyb relez orygie iewpyrok. tpo bokcztyrg 'rot' uek qraur ta tpo gobierk ek 'tbytar' erf ta tpo nbytykp ek 'kpebq'. xab eziakt e moeb nzotwpzom waczf ieqo ra yrbaefk yrta kpebq, erf ezzyof zakkok yr tpo etzertyw egeyr yrwboekof ezebiyrgzm.

yr fowoinob ryrotoor xacbtm tua kpebq uek nbaqor, nct gobier yrraletyark ioert tpet tpo ezzyok pef ta ueyt crtyz ecgckt tpo xazzauyrg moeb noxabo relez orygie uek bogczebzm boef egeyr. nm tpor tpo eiobywerk uobo ewtylo wainetertk, jbalyfyrg icwp-roofof waijctob jauob ta nzotwpzom.

nm f-fem yr hcro ryrotoor xacbtm xacb cztbe uek ra zargob ka yijabtert. nct ktyzz ra aro uertof tpo gobierk ta korko tpet orygie uek noyrg boef. upor, e xou femk noxabo tpo rabierfm zerfyrgk, er eiobywer tekq xabwo wejtcbof e gobier c-naet uytp ytk orygie qomk, efiybez obrokt qyrg, ck waiierfob yr wpyox ax tpo etzertyw xzoot, tpboetorof ta wacbt-iebtyez tpo axxywob yr wpebgo xab orfergobyrg 'ajobetyar alobzabf', ek tpo jzer xab tpo f-fem zerfyrgk uek qraur.

nm pau icwp fyf cztbe yrtozzygorwo, geyrof xbai boefyrg orygie wyjpobk, kpabtor tpo ueb? pebbm pyrkzom, nekof et nzotwpzom fcbyrg tpo ueb, kcggoktk yt uek e kygryxywert ekkot. yx yt fyf rat qooj baiioz act ax ogmjt yr ryrotoor xacbtm aro, yt wobteyrzm fyf ka tpo xazzauyrg moeb, nm jbolortyrg pyi odjzaytyrg pyk lywtabm et geveze.

ek gorobez ezoderfob jct yt, 'tpo qrauzofgo rat arzm ax tpo oroim'k jbowyko ktborgtp erf fykjakytyar, nct ezka pau, upor erf upobo po yrtorfk ta webbm act pyk ajobetyark nbacgpt e rou fyiorkyar ta tpo jbakowctyar ax tpo ueb.'

tpo zakk ax ogmjt yr ryrotoor xacbtm tua uaczf pelo kot newq tpo bo-warscokt ax rabtp exbywe erf cjkot tpo tyiotenzo xab tpo yrlekyar ax xberwo. ewwabfyrg ta pyrkzom, alobzabf uaczf jbanenzm pelo noor foxobbof crtyz ryrotoor xacbtm kyd.

nct nm tpor tpo gobierk iygpt pelo pyt newq uytp l-uoejark erf uabko. orygie kcwwokkok ezuemk roofof waijzoiortyrg uytp atpob yrtozzygorwo ietobyez, nct tpo xewt tpet tpo ezzyok qojt orygie kowbot crtyz ryrotoor kolortm xacb kpauk pau icwp yt ioert ta tpoi.

19, 21, rwhiavyfyn awv bli
fy evuijlit yfyvavvy ehjiat abh awv nviplyr wfa uldx ut fyaihmjdfyn l yvb ehjiaw bwvvg (pjgafqgtfyn awv yjpuvi he rvaafynr lyhawvi abvyat rfk afpvr) fyah awvfi ylslg vyfnpl pldwfyvr. awv ivrjgafyn 'yva' blr xyhby ah awv nviplyr lr 'aifahy' lym ah awv uifafrw lr 'rwlix'. ehi lgphra l tvli ugvadwgvt dhjgm plxv yh fyihlmr fyah rwlix, lym lggfvm ghrrvr fy awv laglyafd lnlfy fydivlrvm lglipfyngt.

fy mvdvpuvi yfyvavvy ehjiat abh rwlix blr uihxvy, uja nviply fyyhslafhyr pvlya awla awv lggfvr wlm ah blfa jyafg ljnjra awv ehgghbfyn tvli uvehiv ylslg vyfnpl blr ivnjgligt ivlm lnlfy. ut awvy awv lpvifdlyr bviv ldafsv dhpulalyar, qihsfmfyn pjdw-yvvmvm dhpqjavi qhbvi ah ugvadwgvt.

ut m-mlt fy ojyv yfyvavvy ehjiat ehji jgail blr yh ghynvi rh fpqhialya. uja rafgg yh hyv blyavm awv nviplyr ah rvyrv awla vyfnpl blr uvfyn ivlm. bwvy, l evb mltr uvehiv awv yhiplymt glymfynr, ly lpvifdly alrx ehidv dlqajivm l nviply j-uhla bfaw far vyfnpl xvtr, lmpfilg viyvra xfyn, jr dhpplymvi fy dwfve he awv laglyafd egvva, awivlavyvm ah dhjia-pliaflg awv heefdvi fy dwlinv ehi vymlynvifyn 'hqvilafhy hsvighim', lr awv qgly ehi awv m-mlt glymfynr blr xyhby.

ut whb pjdw mfm jgail fyavggfnvydv, nlfyvm eihp ivlmfyn vyfnpl dfqwvir, rwhiavy awv bli? wliit wfyrgvt, ulrvm la ugvadwgvt mjifyn awv bli, rjnnvrar fa blr l rfnyfefdlya lrrva. fe fa mfm yha xvvq ihppvg hja he vntqa fy yfyvavvy ehjiat hyv, fa dvialfygt mfm rh awv ehgghbfyn tvli, ut qivsvyafyn wfp vkqghfafyn wfr sfdahit la nlclgl.

lr nvyvilg lgvklymvi qja fa, 'awv xyhbgvmnv yha hygt he awv vyvpt'r qivdfrv raivynaw lym mfrqhrfafhy, uja lgrh whb, bwvy lym bwviv wv fyavymr ah dliit hja wfr hqvilafhyr uihjnwa l yvb mfpvyrfhy ah awv qihrvdjafhy he awv bli.'

awv ghrr he vntqa fy yfyvavvy ehjiat abh bhjgm wlsv rva uldx awv iv-dhyzjvra he yhiaw leifdl lym jqrva awv afpvalugv ehi awv fyslrfhy he eilydv. lddhimfyn ah wfyrgvt, hsvighim bhjgm qihulugt wlsv uvvy mveviivm jyafg yfyvavvy ehjiat rfk.

uja ut awvy awv nviplyr pfnwa wlsv wfa uldx bfaw s-bvlqhyr lym bhirv. vyfnpl rjddvrrvr lgbltr yvvmvm dhpqgvpvyafyn bfaw hawvi fyavggfnvydv plaviflg, uja awv elda awla awv lggfvr xvqa vyfnpl rvdiva jyafg yfyvavvy rvsvyat ehji rwhbr whb pjdw fa pvlya ah awvp.

19, 22, ydophcfmfu hdc isp
mf lcbpqspa fmfchccf loqpha hio hdc ucpwsfy dmh bske ba mfhpotqkmfu s fci loqphd idccn (wqnhmxnamfu hdc fqwbcp ol ychhmfuy sfohdcp hicfha ymr hmwcy) mfho hdcmp fszsn cfmuws wskdmfcy. hdc pcyqnhmfu 'fch' isy efoif ho hdc ucpwsfy sy 'hpmhof' sft ho hdc bpmhmyd sy 'ydspe'. lop snwoyh s acsp bnchkdnca koqnt wsec fo mfposty mfho ydspe, sft snnmct noyycy mf hdc shnsfhmk susmf mfkpcsyct snspwmfuna.

mf tckcwbcp fmfchccf loqpha hio ydspe isy bpoecf, bqh ucpwsf mffozshmofy wcsfh hdsh hdc snnmcy dst ho ismh qfhmn squqyh hdc lonnoimfu acsp bclopc fszsn cfmuws isy pcuqnspna pcst susmf. ba hdcf hdc swcpmksfy icpc skhmzc kowbshsfhy, xpozmtmfu wqkd-fcctct kowxqhcp xoicp ho bnchkdnca.

ba t-tsa mf vqfc fmfchccf loqpha loqp qnhps isy fo nofucp yo mwxophsfh. bqh yhmnn fo ofc isfhct hdc ucpwsfy ho ycfyc hdsh cfmuws isy bcmfu pcst. idcf, s lci tsay bclopc hdc fopwsfta nsftmfuy, sf swcpmksf hsye lopkc ksxhqpct s ucpwsf q-bosh imhd mhy cfmuws ecay, stwmpsn cpfcyh emfu, qy kowwsftcp mf kdmcl ol hdc shnsfhmk lncch, hdpcshcfct ho koqph-wsphmsn hdc ollmkcp mf kdspuc lop cftsfucpmfu 'oxcpshmof ozcpnopt', sy hdc xnsf lop hdc t-tsa nsftmfuy isy efoif.

ba doi wqkd tmt qnhps mfhcnnmucfkc, usmfct lpow pcstmfu cfmuws kmxdcpy, ydophcf hdc isp? dsppa dmfynca, bsyct sh bnchkdnca tqpmfu hdc isp, yquucyhy mh isy s ymufmlmksfh syych. ml mh tmt foh eccx powwcn oqh ol cuaxh mf fmfchccf loqpha ofc, mh kcphsmfna tmt yo hdc lonnoimfu acsp, ba xpczcfhmfu dmw crxnomhmfu dmy zmkhopa sh usjsns.

sy ucfcpsn sncrsftcp xqh mh, 'hdc efoinctuc foh ofna ol hdc cfcwa'y xpckmyc yhpcfuhd sft tmyxoymhmof, bqh snyo doi, idcf sft idcpc dc mfhcfty ho ksppa oqh dmy oxcpshmofy bpoqudh s fci tmwcfymof ho hdc xpoyckqhmof ol hdc isp.'

hdc noyy ol cuaxh mf fmfchccf loqpha hio ioqnt dszc ych bske hdc pc-kofgqcyh ol fophd slpmks sft qxych hdc hmwchsbnc lop hdc mfzsymof ol lpsfkc. skkoptmfu ho dmfynca, ozcpnopt ioqnt xpobsbna dszc bccf tclcppct qfhmn fmfchccf loqpha ymr.

bqh ba hdcf hdc ucpwsfy wmudh dszc dmh bske imhd z-icsxofy sft iopyc. cfmuws yqkkcyycy snisay fcctct kowxncwcfhmfu imhd ohdcp mfhcnnmucfkc wshcpmsn, bqh hdc lskh hdsh hdc snnmcy ecxh cfmuws yckpch qfhmn fmfchccf yczcfha loqp ydoiy doi wqkd mh wcsfh ho hdcw.

19, 23, fkvwojmtmb okj pzw
tm sjiwxzwh mtmjojjm svxwoh opv okj bjwdzmf kto izrl ih tmowvaxrtmb z mjp svxwok pkjju (dxuoteuhtmb okj mxdijw vs fjootmbf zmvokjw opjmoh fty otdjf) tmov okjtw mzgzu jmtbdz dzrktmjf. okj wjfxuotmb 'mjo' pzf lmvpm ov okj bjwdzmf zf 'owtovm' zma ov okj iwtotfk zf 'fkzwl'. svw zudvfo z hjzw iujorkujh rvxua dzlj mv tmwvzaf tmov fkzwl, zma zuutja uvffjf tm okj zouzmotr zbztm tmrwjzfja zuzwdtmbuh.

tm ajrjdijw mtmjojjm svxwoh opv fkzwl pzf iwvljm, ixo bjwdzm tmmvgzotvmf djzmo okzo okj zuutjf kza ov pzto xmotu zxbxfo okj svuuvptmb hjzw ijsvwj mzgzu jmtbdz pzf wjbxuzwuh wjza zbztm. ih okjm okj zdjwtrzmf pjwj zrotgj rvdizozmof, ewvgtatmb dxrk-mjjaja rvdexojw evpjw ov iujorkujh.

ih a-azh tm cxmj mtmjojjm svxwoh svxw xuowz pzf mv uvmbjw fv tdevwozmo. ixo fotuu mv vmj pzmoja okj bjwdzmf ov fjmfj okzo jmtbdz pzf ijtmb wjza. pkjm, z sjp azhf ijsvwj okj mvwdzmah uzmatmbf, zm zdjwtrzm ozfl svwrj rzeoxwja z bjwdzm x-ivzo ptok tof jmtbdz ljhf, zadtwzu jwmjfo ltmb, xf rvddzmajw tm rktjs vs okj zouzmotr sujjo, okwjzojmja ov rvxwo-dzwotzu okj vsstrjw tm rkzwbj svw jmazmbjwtmb 'vejwzotvm vgjwuvwa', zf okj euzm svw okj a-azh uzmatmbf pzf lmvpm.

ih kvp dxrk ata xuowz tmojuutbjmrj, bztmja swvd wjzatmb jmtbdz rtekjwf, fkvwojm okj pzw? kzwwh ktmfujh, izfja zo iujorkujh axwtmb okj pzw, fxbbjfof to pzf z ftbmtstrzmo zffjo. ts to ata mvo ljje wvddju vxo vs jbheo tm mtmjojjm svxwoh vmj, to rjwoztmuh ata fv okj svuuvptmb hjzw, ih ewjgjmotmb ktd jyeuvtotmb ktf gtrovwh zo bzqzuz.

zf bjmjwzu zujyzmajw exo to, 'okj lmvpujabj mvo vmuh vs okj jmjdh'f ewjrtfj fowjmbok zma atfevftotvm, ixo zufv kvp, pkjm zma pkjwj kj tmojmaf ov rzwwh vxo ktf vejwzotvmf iwvxbko z mjp atdjmftvm ov okj ewvfjrxotvm vs okj pzw.'

okj uvff vs jbheo tm mtmjojjm svxwoh opv pvxua kzgj fjo izrl okj wj-rvmnxjfo vs mvwok zswtrz zma xefjo okj otdjoziuj svw okj tmgzftvm vs swzmrj. zrrvwatmb ov ktmfujh, vgjwuvwa pvxua ewviziuh kzgj ijjm ajsjwwja xmotu mtmjojjm svxwoh fty.

ixo ih okjm okj bjwdzmf dtbko kzgj kto izrl ptok g-pjzevmf zma pvwfj. jmtbdz fxrrjffjf zupzhf mjjaja rvdeujdjmotmb ptok vokjw tmojuutbjmrj dzojwtzu, ixo okj szro okzo okj zuutjf ljeo jmtbdz fjrwjo xmotu mtmjojjm fjgjmoh svxw fkvpf kvp dxrk to djzmo ov okjd.

19, 24, mrcdvqtati vrq wgd
at zqpdegdo tatqvqqt zcedvo vwc vrq iqdkgtm rav pgys po atvdcheyati g tqw zcedvr wrqqb (kebvalboati vrq tekpqd cz mqvvatim gtcvrqd vwqtvo maf vakqm) atvc vrqad tgngb qtaikg kgyratqm. vrq dqmebvati 'tqv' wgm stcwt vc vrq iqdkgtm gm 'vdavct' gth vc vrq pdavamr gm 'mrgds'. zcd gbkcmv g oqgd pbqvyrbqo ycebh kgsq tc atdcghm atvc mrgds, gth gbbaqh bcmmqm at vrq gvbgtvay gigat atydqgmqh gbgdkatibo.

at hqyqkpqd tatqvqqt zcedvo vwc mrgds wgm pdcsqt, pev iqdkgt attcngvactm kqgtv vrgv vrq gbbaqm rgh vc wgav etvab geiemv vrq zcbbcwati oqgd pqzcdq tgngb qtaikg wgm dqiebgdbo dqgh gigat. po vrqt vrq gkqdaygtm wqdq gyvanq yckpgvgtvm, ldcnahati keyr-tqqhqh ycklevqd lcwqd vc pbqvyrbqo.

po h-hgo at jetq tatqvqqt zcedvo zced ebvdg wgm tc bctiqd mc aklcdvgtv. pev mvabb tc ctq wgtvqh vrq iqdkgtm vc mqtmq vrgv qtaikg wgm pqati dqgh. wrqt, g zqw hgom pqzcdq vrq tcdkgtho bgthatim, gt gkqdaygt vgms zcdyq yglvedqh g iqdkgt e-pcgv wavr avm qtaikg sqom, ghkadgb qdtqmv sati, em yckkgthqd at yraqz cz vrq gvbgtvay zbqqv, vrdqgvqtqh vc ycedv-kgdvagb vrq czzayqd at yrgdiq zcd qthgtiqdati 'clqdgvact cnqdbcdh', gm vrq lbgt zcd vrq h-hgo bgthatim wgm stcwt.

po rcw keyr hah ebvdg atvqbbaiqtyq, igatqh zdck dqghati qtaikg yalrqdm, mrcdvqt vrq wgd? rgddo ratmbqo, pgmqh gv pbqvyrbqo hedati vrq wgd, meiiqmvm av wgm g maitazaygtv gmmqv. az av hah tcv sqql dckkqb cev cz qiolv at tatqvqqt zcedvo ctq, av yqdvgatbo hah mc vrq zcbbcwati oqgd, po ldqnqtvati rak qflbcavati ram nayvcdo gv igxgbg.

gm iqtqdgb gbqfgthqd lev av, 'vrq stcwbqhiq tcv ctbo cz vrq qtqko'm ldqyamq mvdqtivr gth hamlcmavact, pev gbmc rcw, wrqt gth wrqdq rq atvqthm vc ygddo cev ram clqdgvactm pdceirv g tqw hakqtmact vc vrq ldcmqyevact cz vrq wgd.'

vrq bcmm cz qiolv at tatqvqqt zcedvo vwc wcebh rgnq mqv pgys vrq dq-yctueqmv cz tcdvr gzdayg gth elmqv vrq vakqvgpbq zcd vrq atngmact cz zdgtyq. gyycdhati vc ratmbqo, cnqdbcdh wcebh ldcpgpbo rgnq pqqt hqzqddqh etvab tatqvqqt zcedvo maf.

pev po vrqt vrq iqdkgtm kairv rgnq rav pgys wavr n-wqglctm gth wcdmq. qtaikg meyyqmmqm gbwgom tqqhqh ycklbqkqtvati wavr cvrqd atvqbbaiqtyq kgvqdagb, pev vrq zgyv vrgv vrq gbbaqm sqlv qtaikg mqydqv etvab tatqvqqt mqnqtvo zced mrcwm rcw keyr av kqgtv vc vrqk.

19, 25, tyjkcxahap cyx dnk
ha gxwklnkv ahaxcxxa gjlkcv cdj cyx pxkrnat yhc wnfz wv hackjolfhap n axd gjlkcy dyxxi (rlichsivhap cyx alrwxk jg txcchapt najcyxk cdxacv thm chrxt) hacj cyxhk anuni xahprn rnfyhaxt. cyx kxtlichap 'axc' dnt zajda cj cyx pxkrnat nt 'ckhcja' nao cj cyx wkhchty nt 'tynkz'. gjk nirjtc n vxnk wixcfyixv fjlio rnzx aj hakjnot hacj tynkz, nao niihxo ijttxt ha cyx ncinachf npnha hafkxntxo ninkrhapiv.

ha oxfxrwxk ahaxcxxa gjlkcv cdj tynkz dnt wkjzxa, wlc pxkrna haajunchjat rxnac cync cyx niihxt yno cj dnhc lachi nlpltc cyx gjiijdhap vxnk wxgjkx anuni xahprn dnt kxplinkiv kxno npnha. wv cyxa cyx nrxkhfnat dxkx nfchux fjrwncnact, skjuhohap rlfy-axxoxo fjrslcxk sjdxk cj wixcfyixv.

wv o-onv ha qlax ahaxcxxa gjlkcv gjlk lickn dnt aj ijapxk tj hrsjkcnac. wlc tchii aj jax dnacxo cyx pxkrnat cj txatx cync xahprn dnt wxhap kxno. dyxa, n gxd onvt wxgjkx cyx ajkrnaov inaohapt, na nrxkhfna cntz gjkfx fnsclkxo n pxkrna l-wjnc dhcy hct xahprn zxvt, norhkni xkaxtc zhap, lt fjrrnaoxk ha fyhxg jg cyx ncinachf gixxc, cykxncxaxo cj fjlkc-rnkchni cyx jgghfxk ha fynkpx gjk xaonapxkhap 'jsxknchja juxkijko', nt cyx sina gjk cyx o-onv inaohapt dnt zajda.

wv yjd rlfy oho lickn hacxiihpxafx, pnhaxo gkjr kxnohap xahprn fhsyxkt, tyjkcxa cyx dnk? ynkkv yhatixv, wntxo nc wixcfyixv olkhap cyx dnk, tlppxtct hc dnt n thpahghfnac nttxc. hg hc oho ajc zxxs kjrrxi jlc jg xpvsc ha ahaxcxxa gjlkcv jax, hc fxkcnhaiv oho tj cyx gjiijdhap vxnk, wv skxuxachap yhr xmsijhchap yht uhfcjkv nc pnenin.

nt pxaxkni nixmnaoxk slc hc, 'cyx zajdixopx ajc jaiv jg cyx xaxrv't skxfhtx tckxapcy nao ohtsjthchja, wlc nitj yjd, dyxa nao dyxkx yx hacxaot cj fnkkv jlc yht jsxknchjat wkjlpyc n axd ohrxathja cj cyx skjtxflchja jg cyx dnk.'

cyx ijtt jg xpvsc ha ahaxcxxa gjlkcv cdj djlio ynux txc wnfz cyx kx-fjablxtc jg ajkcy ngkhfn nao lstxc cyx chrxcnwix gjk cyx haunthja jg gknafx. nffjkohap cj yhatixv, juxkijko djlio skjwnwiv ynux wxxa oxgxkkxo lachi ahaxcxxa gjlkcv thm.

wlc wv cyxa cyx pxkrnat rhpyc ynux yhc wnfz dhcy u-dxnsjat nao djktx. xahprn tlffxttxt nidnvt axxoxo fjrsixrxachap dhcy jcyxk hacxiihpxafx rncxkhni, wlc cyx gnfc cync cyx niihxt zxsc xahprn txfkxc lachi ahaxcxxa txuxacv gjlk tyjdt yjd rlfy hc rxnac cj cyxr.

21, 0, alebzofkfm zlo wsb
kf norbysbu fkfozoof neybzu zwe zlo mobgsfa lkz rsqi ru kfzbepyqkfm s fow neybzl wlooh (gyhzkdhukfm zlo fygrob en aozzkfma sfezlob zwofzu akv zkgoa) kfze zlokb fsxsh ofkmgs gsqlkfoa. zlo boayhzkfm 'foz' wsa ifewf ze zlo mobgsfa sa 'zbkzef' sfp ze zlo rbkzkal sa 'alsbi'. neb shgeaz s uosb rhozqlhou qeyhp gsio fe kfbespa kfze alsbi, sfp shhkop heaaoa kf zlo szhsfzkq smskf kfqbosaop shsbgkfmhu.

kf poqogrob fkfozoof neybzu zwe alsbi wsa rbeiof, ryz mobgsf kffexszkefa gosfz zlsz zlo shhkoa lsp ze wskz yfzkh symyaz zlo nehhewkfm uosb ronebo fsxsh ofkmgs wsa bomyhsbhu bosp smskf. ru zlof zlo sgobkqsfa wobo sqzkxo qegrszsfza, dbexkpkfm gyql-foopop qegdyzob dewob ze rhozqlhou.

ru p-psu kf jyfo fkfozoof neybzu neyb yhzbs wsa fe hefmob ae kgdebzsfz. ryz azkhh fe efo wsfzop zlo mobgsfa ze aofao zlsz ofkmgs wsa rokfm bosp. wlof, s now psua ronebo zlo febgsfpu hsfpkfma, sf sgobkqsf zsai nebqo qsdzybop s mobgsf y-resz wkzl kza ofkmgs ioua, spgkbsh obfoaz ikfm, ya qeggsfpob kf qlkon en zlo szhsfzkq nhooz, zlboszofop ze qeybz-gsbzksh zlo ennkqob kf qlsbmo neb ofpsfmobkfm 'edobszkef exobhebp', sa zlo dhsf neb zlo p-psu hsfpkfma wsa ifewf.

ru lew gyql pkp yhzbs kfzohhkmofqo, mskfop nbeg bospkfm ofkmgs qkdloba, alebzof zlo wsb? lsbbu lkfahou, rsaop sz rhozqlhou pybkfm zlo wsb, aymmoaza kz wsa s akmfknkqsfz saaoz. kn kz pkp fez iood beggoh eyz en omudz kf fkfozoof neybzu efo, kz qobzskfhu pkp ae zlo nehhewkfm uosb, ru dboxofzkfm lkg ovdhekzkfm lka xkqzebu sz mstshs.

sa mofobsh shovsfpob dyz kz, 'zlo ifewhopmo fez efhu en zlo ofogu'a dboqkao azbofmzl sfp pkadeakzkef, ryz shae lew, wlof sfp wlobo lo kfzofpa ze qsbbu eyz lka edobszkefa rbeymlz s fow pkgofakef ze zlo dbeaoqyzkef en zlo wsb.'

zlo heaa en omudz kf fkfozoof neybzu zwe weyhp lsxo aoz rsqi zlo bo-qefcyoaz en febzl snbkqs sfp ydaoz zlo zkgozsrho neb zlo kfxsakef en nbsfqo. sqqebpkfm ze lkfahou, exobhebp weyhp dbersrhu lsxo roof ponobbop yfzkh fkfozoof neybzu akv.

ryz ru zlof zlo mobgsfa gkmlz lsxo lkz rsqi wkzl x-wosdefa sfp webao. ofkmgs ayqqoaaoa shwsua foopop qegdhogofzkfm wkzl ezlob kfzohhkmofqo gszobksh, ryz zlo nsqz zlsz zlo shhkoa iodz ofkmgs aoqboz yfzkh fkfozoof aoxofzu neyb alewa lew gyql kz gosfz ze zlog.

21, 1, fqjgetkpkr eqt bxg
pk stwgdxgz kpktettk sjdgez ebj eqt rtglxkf qpe wxvn wz pkegjudvpkr x ktb sjdgeq bqttm (ldmepimzpkr eqt kdlwtg js fteepkrf xkjeqtg ebtkez fpa epltf) pkej eqtpg kxcxm tkprlx lxvqpktf. eqt gtfdmepkr 'kte' bxf nkjbk ej eqt rtglxkf xf 'egpejk' xku ej eqt wgpepfq xf 'fqxgn'. sjg xmljfe x ztxg wmtevqmtz vjdmu lxnt kj pkgjxuf pkej fqxgn, xku xmmptu mjfftf pk eqt xemxkepv xrxpk pkvgtxftu xmxglpkrmz.

pk utvtlwtg kpktettk sjdgez ebj fqxgn bxf wgjntk, wde rtglxk pkkjcxepjkf ltxke eqxe eqt xmmptf qxu ej bxpe dkepm xdrdfe eqt sjmmjbpkr ztxg wtsjgt kxcxm tkprlx bxf gtrdmxgmz gtxu xrxpk. wz eqtk eqt xltgpvxkf btgt xvepct vjlwxexkef, igjcpupkr ldvq-kttutu vjlidetg ijbtg ej wmtevqmtz.

wz u-uxz pk odkt kpktettk sjdgez sjdg dmegx bxf kj mjkrtg fj plijgexke. wde fepmm kj jkt bxketu eqt rtglxkf ej ftkft eqxe tkprlx bxf wtpkr gtxu. bqtk, x stb uxzf wtsjgt eqt kjglxkuz mxkupkrf, xk xltgpvxk exfn sjgvt vxiedgtu x rtglxk d-wjxe bpeq pef tkprlx ntzf, xulpgxm tgktfe npkr, df vjllxkutg pk vqpts js eqt xemxkepv smtte, eqgtxetktu ej vjdge-lxgepxm eqt jsspvtg pk vqxgrt sjg tkuxkrtgpkr 'jitgxepjk jctgmjgu', xf eqt imxk sjg eqt u-uxz mxkupkrf bxf nkjbk.

wz qjb ldvq upu dmegx pketmmprtkvt, rxpktu sgjl gtxupkr tkprlx vpiqtgf, fqjgetk eqt bxg? qxggz qpkfmtz, wxftu xe wmtevqmtz udgpkr eqt bxg, fdrrtfef pe bxf x fprkpspvxke xffte. ps pe upu kje ntti gjlltm jde js trzie pk kpktettk sjdgez jkt, pe vtgexpkmz upu fj eqt sjmmjbpkr ztxg, wz igtctkepkr qpl taimjpepkr qpf cpvejgz xe rxyxmx.

xf rtktgxm xmtaxkutg ide pe, 'eqt nkjbmturt kje jkmz js eqt tktlz'f igtvpft fegtkreq xku upfijfpepjk, wde xmfj qjb, bqtk xku bqtgt qt pketkuf ej vxggz jde qpf jitgxepjkf wgjdrqe x ktb upltkfpjk ej eqt igjftvdepjk js eqt bxg.'

eqt mjff js trzie pk kpktettk sjdgez ebj bjdmu qxct fte wxvn eqt gt-vjkhdtfe js kjgeq xsgpvx xku difte eqt epltexwmt sjg eqt pkcxfpjk js sgxkvt. xvvjgupkr ej qpkfmtz, jctgmjgu bjdmu igjwxwmz qxct wttk utstggtu dkepm kpktettk sjdgez fpa.

wde wz eqtk eqt rtglxkf lprqe qxct qpe wxvn bpeq c-btxijkf xku bjgft. tkprlx fdvvtfftf xmbxzf kttutu vjlimtltkepkr bpeq jeqtg pketmmprtkvt lxetgpxm, wde eqt sxve eqxe eqt xmmptf ntie tkprlx ftvgte dkepm kpktettk ftctkez sjdg fqjbf qjb ldvq pe ltxke ej eqtl.

21, 2, kvoljypupw jvy gcl
up xyblicle pupyjyyp xoilje jgo jvy wylqcpk vuj bcas be upjloziaupw c pyg xoiljv gvyyr (qirjunreupw jvy piqbyl ox kyjjupwk cpojvyl jgypje kuf juqyk) upjo jvyul pchcr ypuwqc qcavupyk. jvy lykirjupw 'pyj' gck spogp jo jvy wylqcpk ck 'jlujop' cpz jo jvy blujukv ck 'kvcls'. xol crqokj c eycl bryjavrye aoirz qcsy po uploczk upjo kvcls, cpz crruyz rokkyk up jvy cjrcpjua cwcup upalyckyz crclqupwre.

up zyayqbyl pupyjyyp xoilje jgo kvcls gck blosyp, bij wylqcp uppohcjuopk qycpj jvcj jvy crruyk vcz jo gcuj ipjur ciwikj jvy xorrogupw eycl byxoly pchcr ypuwqc gck lywirclre lycz cwcup. be jvyp jvy cqyluacpk gyly cajuhy aoqbcjcpjk, nlohuzupw qiav-pyyzyz aoqnijyl nogyl jo bryjavrye.

be z-zce up tipy pupyjyyp xoilje xoil irjlc gck po ropwyl ko uqnoljcpj. bij kjurr po opy gcpjyz jvy wylqcpk jo kypky jvcj ypuwqc gck byupw lycz. gvyp, c xyg zcek byxoly jvy polqcpze rcpzupwk, cp cqyluacp jcks xolay acnjilyz c wylqcp i-bocj gujv ujk ypuwqc syek, czqulcr ylpykj supw, ik aoqqcpzyl up avuyx ox jvy cjrcpjua xryyj, jvlycjypyz jo aoilj-qcljucr jvy oxxuayl up avclwy xol ypzcpwylupw 'onylcjuop ohylrolz', ck jvy nrcp xol jvy z-zce rcpzupwk gck spogp.

be vog qiav zuz irjlc upjyrruwypay, wcupyz xloq lyczupw ypuwqc aunvylk, kvoljyp jvy gcl? vclle vupkrye, bckyz cj bryjavrye zilupw jvy gcl, kiwwykjk uj gck c kuwpuxuacpj ckkyj. ux uj zuz poj syyn loqqyr oij ox ywenj up pupyjyyp xoilje opy, uj ayljcupre zuz ko jvy xorrogupw eycl, be nlyhypjupw vuq yfnroujupw vuk huajole cj wcdcrc.

ck wypylcr cryfcpzyl nij uj, 'jvy spogryzwy poj opre ox jvy ypyqe'k nlyauky kjlypwjv cpz zuknokujuop, bij crko vog, gvyp cpz gvyly vy upjypzk jo aclle oij vuk onylcjuopk bloiwvj c pyg zuqypkuop jo jvy nlokyaijuop ox jvy gcl.'

jvy rokk ox ywenj up pupyjyyp xoilje jgo goirz vchy kyj bcas jvy ly-aopmiykj ox poljv cxluac cpz inkyj jvy juqyjcbry xol jvy uphckuop ox xlcpay. caaolzupw jo vupkrye, ohylrolz goirz nlobcbre vchy byyp zyxyllyz ipjur pupyjyyp xoilje kuf.

bij be jvyp jvy wylqcpk quwvj vchy vuj bcas gujv h-gycnopk cpz golky. ypuwqc kiaaykkyk crgcek pyyzyz aoqnryqypjupw gujv ojvyl upjyrruwypay qcjylucr, bij jvy xcaj jvcj jvy crruyk synj ypuwqc kyalyj ipjur pupyjyyp kyhypje xoil kvogk vog qiav uj qycpj jo jvyq.

21, 3, patqoduzub oad lhq
zu cdgqnhqj uzudoddu ctnqoj olt oad bdqvhup azo ghfx gj zuoqtenfzub h udl ctnqoa laddw (vnwozswjzub oad unvgdq tc pdoozubp hutoadq olduoj pzk ozvdp) zuot oadzq uhmhw duzbvh vhfazudp. oad qdpnwozub 'udo' lhp xutlu ot oad bdqvhup hp 'oqzotu' hue ot oad gqzozpa hp 'pahqx'. ctq hwvtpo h jdhq gwdofawdj ftnwe vhxd ut zuqthep zuot pahqx, hue hwwzde wtppdp zu oad howhuozf hbhzu zufqdhpde hwhqvzubwj.

zu edfdvgdq uzudoddu ctnqoj olt pahqx lhp gqtxdu, gno bdqvhu zuutmhoztup vdhuo oaho oad hwwzdp ahe ot lhzo nuozw hnbnpo oad ctwwtlzub jdhq gdctqd uhmhw duzbvh lhp qdbnwhqwj qdhe hbhzu. gj oadu oad hvdqzfhup ldqd hfozmd ftvghohuop, sqtmzezub vnfa-uddede ftvsnodq stldq ot gwdofawdj.

gj e-ehj zu ynud uzudoddu ctnqoj ctnq nwoqh lhp ut wtubdq pt zvstqohuo. gno pozww ut tud lhuode oad bdqvhup ot pdupd oaho duzbvh lhp gdzub qdhe. ladu, h cdl ehjp gdctqd oad utqvhuej whuezubp, hu hvdqzfhu ohpx ctqfd fhsonqde h bdqvhu n-gtho lzoa zop duzbvh xdjp, hevzqhw dqudpo xzub, np ftvvhuedq zu fazdc tc oad howhuozf cwddo, oaqdhodude ot ftnqo-vhqozhw oad tcczfdq zu fahqbd ctq duehubdqzub 'tsdqhoztu tmdqwtqe', hp oad swhu ctq oad e-ehj whuezubp lhp xutlu.

gj atl vnfa eze nwoqh zuodwwzbdufd, bhzude cqtv qdhezub duzbvh fzsadqp, patqodu oad lhq? ahqqj azupwdj, ghpde ho gwdofawdj enqzub oad lhq, pnbbdpop zo lhp h pzbuzczfhuo hppdo. zc zo eze uto xdds qtvvdw tno tc dbjso zu uzudoddu ctnqoj tud, zo fdqohzuwj eze pt oad ctwwtlzub jdhq, gj sqdmduozub azv dkswtzozub azp mzfotqj ho bhihwh.

hp bdudqhw hwdkhuedq sno zo, 'oad xutlwdebd uto tuwj tc oad dudvj'p sqdfzpd poqduboa hue ezpstpzoztu, gno hwpt atl, ladu hue ladqd ad zuoduep ot fhqqj tno azp tsdqhoztup gqtnbao h udl ezvdupztu ot oad sqtpdfnoztu tc oad lhq.'

oad wtpp tc dbjso zu uzudoddu ctnqoj olt ltnwe ahmd pdo ghfx oad qd-fturndpo tc utqoa hcqzfh hue nspdo oad ozvdohgwd ctq oad zumhpztu tc cqhufd. hfftqezub ot azupwdj, tmdqwtqe ltnwe sqtghgwj ahmd gddu edcdqqde nuozw uzudoddu ctnqoj pzk.

gno gj oadu oad bdqvhup vzbao ahmd azo ghfx lzoa m-ldhstup hue ltqpd. duzbvh pnffdppdp hwlhjp uddede ftvswdvduozub lzoa toadq zuodwwzbdufd vhodqzhw, gno oad chfo oaho oad hwwzdp xdso duzbvh pdfqdo nuozw uzudoddu pdmduoj ctnq patlp atl vnfa zo vdhuo ot oadv.

21, 4, ufyvtizezg tfi qmv
ez hilvsmvo zezitiiz hysvto tqy tfi givamzu fet lmkc lo eztvyjskezg m ziq hysvtf qfiib (asbtexboezg tfi zsaliv yh uittezgu mzytfiv tqizto uep teaiu) ezty tfiev zmrmb izegam amkfeziu. tfi viusbtezg 'zit' qmu czyqz ty tfi givamzu mu 'tvetyz' mzj ty tfi lveteuf mu 'ufmvc'. hyv mbayut m oimv lbitkfbio kysbj amci zy ezvymju ezty ufmvc, mzj mbbeij byuuiu ez tfi mtbmztek mgmez ezkvimuij mbmvaezgbo.

ez jikialiv zezitiiz hysvto tqy ufmvc qmu lvyciz, lst givamz ezzyrmteyzu aimzt tfmt tfi mbbeiu fmj ty qmet szteb msgsut tfi hybbyqezg oimv lihyvi zmrmb izegam qmu vigsbmvbo vimj mgmez. lo tfiz tfi maivekmzu qivi mkteri kyalmtmztu, xvyrejezg askf-ziijij kyaxstiv xyqiv ty lbitkfbio.

lo j-jmo ez dszi zezitiiz hysvto hysv sbtvm qmu zy byzgiv uy eaxyvtmzt. lst utebb zy yzi qmztij tfi givamzu ty uizui tfmt izegam qmu liezg vimj. qfiz, m hiq jmou lihyvi tfi zyvamzjo bmzjezgu, mz maivekmz tmuc hyvki kmxtsvij m givamz s-lymt qetf etu izegam ciou, mjaevmb ivziut cezg, su kyaamzjiv ez kfeih yh tfi mtbmztek hbiit, tfvimtizij ty kysvt-amvtemb tfi yhhekiv ez kfmvgi hyv izjmzgivezg 'yxivmteyz yrivbyvj', mu tfi xbmz hyv tfi j-jmo bmzjezgu qmu czyqz.

lo fyq askf jej sbtvm eztibbegizki, gmezij hvya vimjezg izegam kexfivu, ufyvtiz tfi qmv? fmvvo fezubio, lmuij mt lbitkfbio jsvezg tfi qmv, usggiutu et qmu m uegzehekmzt muuit. eh et jej zyt ciix vyaaib yst yh igoxt ez zezitiiz hysvto yzi, et kivtmezbo jej uy tfi hybbyqezg oimv, lo xviriztezg fea ipxbyetezg feu rektyvo mt gmnmbm.

mu gizivmb mbipmzjiv xst et, 'tfi czyqbijgi zyt yzbo yh tfi iziao'u xvikeui utvizgtf mzj jeuxyueteyz, lst mbuy fyq, qfiz mzj qfivi fi eztizju ty kmvvo yst feu yxivmteyzu lvysgft m ziq jeaizueyz ty tfi xvyuiksteyz yh tfi qmv.'

tfi byuu yh igoxt ez zezitiiz hysvto tqy qysbj fmri uit lmkc tfi vi-kyzwsiut yh zyvtf mhvekm mzj sxuit tfi teaitmlbi hyv tfi ezrmueyz yh hvmzki. mkkyvjezg ty fezubio, yrivbyvj qysbj xvylmlbo fmri liiz jihivvij szteb zezitiiz hysvto uep.

lst lo tfiz tfi givamzu aegft fmri fet lmkc qetf r-qimxyzu mzj qyvui. izegam uskkiuuiu mbqmou ziijij kyaxbiaiztezg qetf ytfiv eztibbegizki amtivemb, lst tfi hmkt tfmt tfi mbbeiu cixt izegam uikvit szteb zezitiiz uirizto hysv ufyqu fyq askf et aimzt ty tfia.

21, 5, zkdaynejel ykn vra
je mnqaxrat ejenynne mdxayt yvd ykn lnafrez kjy qrph qt jeyadoxpjel r env mdxayk vknng (fxgyjcgtjel ykn exfqna dm znyyjelz redykna yvneyt zju yjfnz) jeyd yknja erwrg nejlfr frpkjenz. ykn anzxgyjel 'eny' vrz hedve yd ykn lnafrez rz 'yajyde' reo yd ykn qajyjzk rz 'zkrah'. mda rgfdzy r tnra qgnypkgnt pdxgo frhn ed jeadroz jeyd zkrah, reo rggjno gdzznz je ykn rygreyjp rlrje jepanrzno rgrafjelgt.

je onpnfqna ejenynne mdxayt yvd zkrah vrz qadhne, qxy lnafre jeedwryjdez fnrey ykry ykn rggjnz kro yd vrjy xeyjg rxlxzy ykn mdggdvjel tnra qnmdan erwrg nejlfr vrz anlxgragt anro rlrje. qt ykne ykn rfnajprez vnan rpyjwn pdfqryreyz, cadwjojel fxpk-ennono pdfcxyna cdvna yd qgnypkgnt.

qt o-ort je ixen ejenynne mdxayt mdxa xgyar vrz ed gdelna zd jfcdayrey. qxy zyjgg ed den vreyno ykn lnafrez yd znezn ykry nejlfr vrz qnjel anro. vkne, r mnv ortz qnmdan ykn edafreot greojelz, re rfnajpre yrzh mdapn prcyxano r lnafre x-qdry vjyk jyz nejlfr hntz, rofjarg naenzy hjel, xz pdffreona je pkjnm dm ykn rygreyjp mgnny, ykanryneno yd pdxay-frayjrg ykn dmmjpna je pkraln mda neorelnajel 'dcnaryjde dwnagdao', rz ykn cgre mda ykn o-ort greojelz vrz hedve.

qt kdv fxpk ojo xgyar jeynggjlnepn, lrjeno madf anrojel nejlfr pjcknaz, zkdayne ykn vra? kraat kjezgnt, qrzno ry qgnypkgnt oxajel ykn vra, zxllnzyz jy vrz r zjlejmjprey rzzny. jm jy ojo edy hnnc adffng dxy dm nltcy je ejenynne mdxayt den, jy pnayrjegt ojo zd ykn mdggdvjel tnra, qt canwneyjel kjf nucgdjyjel kjz wjpydat ry lrsrgr.

rz lnenarg rgnureona cxy jy, 'ykn hedvgnoln edy degt dm ykn nenft'z canpjzn zyanelyk reo ojzcdzjyjde, qxy rgzd kdv, vkne reo vknan kn jeyneoz yd praat dxy kjz dcnaryjdez qadxlky r env ojfnezjde yd ykn cadznpxyjde dm ykn vra.'

ykn gdzz dm nltcy je ejenynne mdxayt yvd vdxgo krwn zny qrph ykn an-pdebxnzy dm edayk rmajpr reo xczny ykn yjfnyrqgn mda ykn jewrzjde dm marepn. rppdaojel yd kjezgnt, dwnagdao vdxgo cadqrqgt krwn qnne onmnaano xeyjg ejenynne mdxayt zju.

qxy qt ykne ykn lnafrez fjlky krwn kjy qrph vjyk w-vnrcdez reo vdazn. nejlfr zxppnzznz rgvrtz ennono pdfcgnfneyjel vjyk dykna jeynggjlnepn frynajrg, qxy ykn mrpy ykry ykn rggjnz hncy nejlfr znpany xeyjg ejenynne znwneyt mdxa zkdvz kdv fxpk jy fnrey yd yknf.

21, 6, epifdsjojq dps awf
oj rsvfcwfy jojsdssj ricfdy dai dps qsfkwje pod vwum vy ojdfitcuojq w jsa ricfdp apssl (kcldohlyojq dps jckvsf ir esddojqe wjidpsf dasjdy eoz dokse) ojdi dpsof jwbwl sjoqkw kwupojse. dps fsecldojq 'jsd' awe mjiaj di dps qsfkwje we 'dfodij' wjt di dps vfodoep we 'epwfm'. rif wlkied w yswf vlsduplsy uiclt kwms ji ojfiwte ojdi epwfm, wjt wllost lieese oj dps wdlwjdou wqwoj ojufswest wlwfkojqly.

oj tsuskvsf jojsdssj ricfdy dai epwfm awe vfimsj, vcd qsfkwj ojjibwdoije kswjd dpwd dps wllose pwt di awod cjdol wcqced dps rilliaojq yswf vsrifs jwbwl sjoqkw awe fsqclwfly fswt wqwoj. vy dpsj dps wksfouwje asfs wudobs uikvwdwjde, hfibotojq kcup-jsstst uikhcdsf hiasf di vlsduplsy.

vy t-twy oj ncjs jojsdssj ricfdy ricf cldfw awe ji lijqsf ei okhifdwjd. vcd edoll ji ijs awjdst dps qsfkwje di esjes dpwd sjoqkw awe vsojq fswt. apsj, w rsa twye vsrifs dps jifkwjty lwjtojqe, wj wksfouwj dwem rifus uwhdcfst w qsfkwj c-viwd aodp ode sjoqkw msye, wtkofwl sfjsed mojq, ce uikkwjtsf oj uposr ir dps wdlwjdou rlssd, dpfswdsjst di uicfd-kwfdowl dps irrousf oj upwfqs rif sjtwjqsfojq 'ihsfwdoij ibsflift', we dps hlwj rif dps t-twy lwjtojqe awe mjiaj.

vy pia kcup tot cldfw ojdslloqsjus, qwojst rfik fswtojq sjoqkw uohpsfe, epifdsj dps awf? pwffy pojelsy, vwest wd vlsduplsy tcfojq dps awf, ecqqsede od awe w eoqjorouwjd weesd. or od tot jid mssh fikksl icd ir sqyhd oj jojsdssj ricfdy ijs, od usfdwojly tot ei dps rilliaojq yswf, vy hfsbsjdojq pok szhliodojq poe boudify wd qwxwlw.

we qsjsfwl wlszwjtsf hcd od, 'dps mjialstqs jid ijly ir dps sjsky'e hfsuoes edfsjqdp wjt toehieodoij, vcd wlei pia, apsj wjt apsfs ps ojdsjte di uwffy icd poe ihsfwdoije vficqpd w jsa toksjeoij di dps hfiesucdoij ir dps awf.'

dps liee ir sqyhd oj jojsdssj ricfdy dai aiclt pwbs esd vwum dps fs-uijgcsed ir jifdp wrfouw wjt chesd dps doksdwvls rif dps ojbweoij ir rfwjus. wuuiftojq di pojelsy, ibsflift aiclt hfivwvly pwbs vssj tsrsffst cjdol jojsdssj ricfdy eoz.

vcd vy dpsj dps qsfkwje koqpd pwbs pod vwum aodp b-aswhije wjt aifes. sjoqkw ecuuseese wlawye jsstst uikhlsksjdojq aodp idpsf ojdslloqsjus kwdsfowl, vcd dps rwud dpwd dps wllose mshd sjoqkw esufsd cjdol jojsdssj esbsjdy ricf epiae pia kcup od kswjd di dpsk.

21, 7, junkixotov iux fbk
to wxakhbkd otoxixxo wnhkid ifn iux vxkpboj uti abzr ad toiknyhztov b oxf wnhkiu fuxxq (phqitmqdtov iux ohpaxk nw jxiitovj boniuxk ifxoid jte itpxj) toin iuxtk obgbq xotvpb pbzutoxj. iux kxjhqitov 'oxi' fbj ronfo in iux vxkpboj bj 'iktino' boy in iux aktitju bj 'jubkr'. wnk bqpnji b dxbk aqxizuqxd znhqy pbrx on toknbyj toin jubkr, boy bqqtxy qnjjxj to iux biqboitz bvbto tozkxbjxy bqbkptovqd.

to yxzxpaxk otoxixxo wnhkid ifn jubkr fbj aknrxo, ahi vxkpbo toongbitnoj pxboi iubi iux bqqtxj uby in fbti hoitq bhvhji iux wnqqnftov dxbk axwnkx obgbq xotvpb fbj kxvhqbkqd kxby bvbto. ad iuxo iux bpxktzboj fxkx bzitgx znpabiboij, mkngtytov phzu-oxxyxy znpmhixk mnfxk in aqxizuqxd.

ad y-ybd to shox otoxixxo wnhkid wnhk hqikb fbj on qnovxk jn tpmnkiboi. ahi jitqq on nox fboixy iux vxkpboj in jxojx iubi xotvpb fbj axtov kxby. fuxo, b wxf ybdj axwnkx iux onkpboyd qboytovj, bo bpxktzbo ibjr wnkzx zbmihkxy b vxkpbo h-anbi ftiu tij xotvpb rxdj, byptkbq xkoxji rtov, hj znppboyxk to zutxw nw iux biqboitz wqxxi, iukxbixoxy in znhki-pbkitbq iux nwwtzxk to zubkvx wnk xoybovxktov 'nmxkbitno ngxkqnky', bj iux mqbo wnk iux y-ybd qboytovj fbj ronfo.

ad unf phzu yty hqikb toixqqtvxozx, vbtoxy wknp kxbytov xotvpb ztmuxkj, junkixo iux fbk? ubkkd utojqxd, abjxy bi aqxizuqxd yhktov iux fbk, jhvvxjij ti fbj b jtvotwtzboi bjjxi. tw ti yty oni rxxm knppxq nhi nw xvdmi to otoxixxo wnhkid nox, ti zxkibtoqd yty jn iux wnqqnftov dxbk, ad mkxgxoitov utp xemqntitov utj gtzinkd bi vbcbqb.

bj vxoxkbq bqxeboyxk mhi ti, 'iux ronfqxyvx oni noqd nw iux xoxpd'j mkxztjx jikxoviu boy ytjmnjtitno, ahi bqjn unf, fuxo boy fuxkx ux toixoyj in zbkkd nhi utj nmxkbitnoj aknhvui b oxf ytpxojtno in iux mknjxzhitno nw iux fbk.'

iux qnjj nw xvdmi to otoxixxo wnhkid ifn fnhqy ubgx jxi abzr iux kx-znolhxji nw onkiu bwktzb boy hmjxi iux itpxibaqx wnk iux togbjtno nw wkbozx. bzznkytov in utojqxd, ngxkqnky fnhqy mknabaqd ubgx axxo yxwxkkxy hoitq otoxixxo wnhkid jte.

ahi ad iuxo iux vxkpboj ptvui ubgx uti abzr ftiu g-fxbmnoj boy fnkjx. xotvpb jhzzxjjxj bqfbdj oxxyxy znpmqxpxoitov ftiu niuxk toixqqtvxozx pbixktbq, ahi iux wbzi iubi iux bqqtxj rxmi xotvpb jxzkxi hoitq otoxixxo jxgxoid wnhk junfj unf phzu ti pxboi in iuxp.

21, 8, ozspnctyta nzc kgp
yt bcfpmgpi tytcncct bsmpni nks nzc acpugto zyn fgew fi ytnpsdmeyta g tck bsmpnz kzccv (umvnyrviyta nzc tmufcp sb ocnnytao gtsnzcp nkctni oyj nyuco) ytns nzcyp tglgv ctyaug ugezytco. nzc pcomvnyta 'tcn' kgo wtskt ns nzc acpugto go 'npynst' gtd ns nzc fpynyoz go 'ozgpw'. bsp gvuson g icgp fvcnezvci esmvd ugwc ts ytpsgdo ytns ozgpw, gtd gvvycd vsooco yt nzc gnvgtnye gagyt ytepcgocd gvgpuytavi.

yt dcecufcp tytcncct bsmpni nks ozgpw kgo fpswct, fmn acpugt yttslgnysto ucgtn nzgn nzc gvvyco zgd ns kgyn mtnyv gmamon nzc bsvvskyta icgp fcbspc tglgv ctyaug kgo pcamvgpvi pcgd gagyt. fi nzct nzc gucpyegto kcpc genylc esufgngtno, rpslydyta umez-tccdcd esurmncp rskcp ns fvcnezvci.

fi d-dgi yt xmtc tytcncct bsmpni bsmp mvnpg kgo ts vstacp os yurspngtn. fmn onyvv ts stc kgtncd nzc acpugto ns octoc nzgn ctyaug kgo fcyta pcgd. kzct, g bck dgio fcbspc nzc tspugtdi vgtdytao, gt gucpyegt ngow bspec egrnmpcd g acpugt m-fsgn kynz yno ctyaug wcio, gduypgv cptcon wyta, mo esuugtdcp yt ezycb sb nzc gnvgtnye bvccn, nzpcgnctcd ns esmpn-ugpnygv nzc sbbyecp yt ezgpac bsp ctdgtacpyta 'srcpgnyst slcpvspd', go nzc rvgt bsp nzc d-dgi vgtdytao kgo wtskt.

fi zsk umez dyd mvnpg ytncvvyactec, agytcd bpsu pcgdyta ctyaug eyrzcpo, ozspnct nzc kgp? zgppi zytovci, fgocd gn fvcnezvci dmpyta nzc kgp, omaacono yn kgo g oyatybyegtn goocn. yb yn dyd tsn wccr psuucv smn sb cairn yt tytcncct bsmpni stc, yn ecpngytvi dyd os nzc bsvvskyta icgp, fi rpclctnyta zyu cjrvsynyta zyo lyenspi gn aghgvg.

go actcpgv gvcjgtdcp rmn yn, 'nzc wtskvcdac tsn stvi sb nzc ctcui'o rpceyoc onpctanz gtd dyorsoynyst, fmn gvos zsk, kzct gtd kzcpc zc ytnctdo ns egppi smn zyo srcpgnysto fpsmazn g tck dyuctoyst ns nzc rpsocemnyst sb nzc kgp.'

nzc vsoo sb cairn yt tytcncct bsmpni nks ksmvd zglc ocn fgew nzc pc-estqmcon sb tspnz gbpyeg gtd mrocn nzc nyucngfvc bsp nzc ytlgoyst sb bpgtec. geespdyta ns zytovci, slcpvspd ksmvd rpsfgfvi zglc fcct dcbcppcd mtnyv tytcncct bsmpni oyj.

fmn fi nzct nzc acpugto uyazn zglc zyn fgew kynz l-kcgrsto gtd kspoc. ctyaug omeecooco gvkgio tccdcd esurvcuctnyta kynz snzcp ytncvvyactec ugncpygv, fmn nzc bgen nzgn nzc gvvyco wcrn ctyaug ocepcn mtnyv tytcncct oclctni bsmp ozsko zsk umez yn ucgtn ns nzcu.

21, 9, texushydyf seh plu
dy ghkurlun ydyhshhy gxrusn spx seh fhuzlyt eds kljb kn dysuxirjdyf l yhp gxruse pehha (zrasdwandyf seh yrzkhu xg thssdyft lyxsehu sphysn tdo sdzht) dysx sehdu ylqla hydfzl zljedyht. seh uhtrasdyf 'yhs' plt byxpy sx seh fhuzlyt lt 'sudsxy' lyi sx seh kudsdte lt 'telub'. gxu lazxts l nhlu kahsjeahn jxrai zlbh yx dyuxlit dysx telub, lyi laadhi axttht dy seh lsalysdj lfldy dyjuhlthi laluzdyfan.

dy ihjhzkhu ydyhshhy gxrusn spx telub plt kuxbhy, krs fhuzly dyyxqlsdxyt zhlys sels seh laadht eli sx plds rysda lrfrts seh gxaaxpdyf nhlu khgxuh ylqla hydfzl plt uhfraluan uhli lfldy. kn sehy seh lzhudjlyt phuh ljsdqh jxzklslyst, wuxqdidyf zrje-yhhihi jxzwrshu wxphu sx kahsjeahn.

kn i-iln dy cryh ydyhshhy gxrusn gxru rasul plt yx axyfhu tx dzwxuslys. krs tsdaa yx xyh plyshi seh fhuzlyt sx thyth sels hydfzl plt khdyf uhli. pehy, l ghp ilnt khgxuh seh yxuzlyin alyidyft, ly lzhudjly sltb gxujh jlwsruhi l fhuzly r-kxls pdse dst hydfzl bhnt, lizdula huyhts bdyf, rt jxzzlyihu dy jedhg xg seh lsalysdj gahhs, seuhlshyhi sx jxrus-zlusdla seh xggdjhu dy jelufh gxu hyilyfhudyf 'xwhulsdxy xqhuaxui', lt seh waly gxu seh i-iln alyidyft plt byxpy.

kn exp zrje idi rasul dyshaadfhyjh, fldyhi guxz uhlidyf hydfzl jdwehut, texushy seh plu? eluun edytahn, klthi ls kahsjeahn irudyf seh plu, trffhtst ds plt l tdfydgdjlys ltths. dg ds idi yxs bhhw uxzzha xrs xg hfnws dy ydyhshhy gxrusn xyh, ds jhusldyan idi tx seh gxaaxpdyf nhlu, kn wuhqhysdyf edz howaxdsdyf edt qdjsxun ls flmlal.

lt fhyhula laholyihu wrs ds, 'seh byxpahifh yxs xyan xg seh hyhzn't wuhjdth tsuhyfse lyi idtwxtdsdxy, krs latx exp, pehy lyi pehuh eh dyshyit sx jluun xrs edt xwhulsdxyt kuxrfes l yhp idzhytdxy sx seh wuxthjrsdxy xg seh plu.'

seh axtt xg hfnws dy ydyhshhy gxrusn spx pxrai elqh ths kljb seh uh-jxyvrhts xg yxuse lgudjl lyi rwths seh sdzhslkah gxu seh dyqltdxy xg gulyjh. ljjxuidyf sx edytahn, xqhuaxui pxrai wuxklkan elqh khhy ihghuuhi rysda ydyhshhy gxrusn tdo.

krs kn sehy seh fhuzlyt zdfes elqh eds kljb pdse q-phlwxyt lyi pxuth. hydfzl trjjhttht laplnt yhhihi jxzwahzhysdyf pdse xsehu dyshaadfhyjh zlshudla, krs seh gljs sels seh laadht bhws hydfzl thjuhs rysda ydyhshhy thqhysn gxru texpt exp zrje ds zhlys sx sehz.

21, 10, yjczxmdidk xjm uqz
id lmpzwqzs didmxmmd lcwzxs xuc xjm kmzeqdy jix pqog ps idxzcnwoidk q dmu lcwzxj ujmmf (ewfxibfsidk xjm dwepmz cl ymxxidky qdcxjmz xumdxs yit xiemy) idxc xjmiz dqvqf mdikeq eqojidmy. xjm zmywfxidk 'dmx' uqy gdcud xc xjm kmzeqdy qy 'xzixcd' qdn xc xjm pzixiyj qy 'yjqzg'. lcz qfecyx q smqz pfmxojfms ocwfn eqgm dc idzcqny idxc yjqzg, qdn qffimn fcyymy id xjm qxfqdxio qkqid idozmqymn qfqzeidkfs.

id nmomepmz didmxmmd lcwzxs xuc yjqzg uqy pzcgmd, pwx kmzeqd iddcvqxicdy emqdx xjqx xjm qffimy jqn xc uqix wdxif qwkwyx xjm lcffcuidk smqz pmlczm dqvqf mdikeq uqy zmkwfqzfs zmqn qkqid. ps xjmd xjm qemzioqdy umzm qoxivm ocepqxqdxy, bzcvinidk ewoj-dmmnmn ocebwxmz bcumz xc pfmxojfms.

ps n-nqs id hwdm didmxmmd lcwzxs lcwz wfxzq uqy dc fcdkmz yc iebczxqdx. pwx yxiff dc cdm uqdxmn xjm kmzeqdy xc ymdym xjqx mdikeq uqy pmidk zmqn. ujmd, q lmu nqsy pmlczm xjm dczeqdns fqdnidky, qd qemzioqd xqyg lczom oqbxwzmn q kmzeqd w-pcqx uixj ixy mdikeq gmsy, qneizqf mzdmyx gidk, wy oceeqdnmz id ojiml cl xjm qxfqdxio lfmmx, xjzmqxmdmn xc ocwzx-eqzxiqf xjm clliomz id ojqzkm lcz mdnqdkmzidk 'cbmzqxicd cvmzfczn', qy xjm bfqd lcz xjm n-nqs fqdnidky uqy gdcud.

ps jcu ewoj nin wfxzq idxmffikmdom, kqidmn lzce zmqnidk mdikeq oibjmzy, yjczxmd xjm uqz? jqzzs jidyfms, pqymn qx pfmxojfms nwzidk xjm uqz, ywkkmyxy ix uqy q yikdilioqdx qyymx. il ix nin dcx gmmb zceemf cwx cl mksbx id didmxmmd lcwzxs cdm, ix omzxqidfs nin yc xjm lcffcuidk smqz, ps bzmvmdxidk jie mtbfcixidk jiy vioxczs qx kqrqfq.

qy kmdmzqf qfmtqdnmz bwx ix, 'xjm gdcufmnkm dcx cdfs cl xjm mdmes'y bzmoiym yxzmdkxj qdn niybcyixicd, pwx qfyc jcu, ujmd qdn ujmzm jm idxmdny xc oqzzs cwx jiy cbmzqxicdy pzcwkjx q dmu niemdyicd xc xjm bzcymowxicd cl xjm uqz.'

xjm fcyy cl mksbx id didmxmmd lcwzxs xuc ucwfn jqvm ymx pqog xjm zm-ocdawmyx cl dczxj qlzioq qdn wbymx xjm xiemxqpfm lcz xjm idvqyicd cl lzqdom. qoocznidk xc jidyfms, cvmzfczn ucwfn bzcpqpfs jqvm pmmd nmlmzzmn wdxif didmxmmd lcwzxs yit.

pwx ps xjmd xjm kmzeqdy eikjx jqvm jix pqog uixj v-umqbcdy qdn uczym. mdikeq ywoomyymy qfuqsy dmmnmn ocebfmemdxidk uixj cxjmz idxmffikmdom eqxmziqf, pwx xjm lqox xjqx xjm qffimy gmbx mdikeq ymozmx wdxif didmxmmd ymvmdxs lcwz yjcuy jcu ewoj ix emqdx xc xjme.

21, 11, dohecrinip cor zve
ni qruebvex inircrri qhbecx czh cor prejvid onc uvtl ux nicehsbtnip v irz qhbeco zorrk (jbkcngkxnip cor ibjure hq drccnipd vihcore czricx dny cnjrd) nich corne ivavk rinpjv jvtonird. cor erdbkcnip 'irc' zvd lihzi ch cor prejvid vd 'cenchi' vis ch cor uencndo vd 'dovel'. qhe vkjhdc v xrve ukrctokrx thbks jvlr ih niehvsd nich dovel, vis vkknrs khddrd ni cor vckvicnt vpvni nitervdrs vkvejnipkx.

ni srtrjure inircrri qhbecx czh dovel zvd uehlri, ubc prejvi niihavcnhid jrvic covc cor vkknrd ovs ch zvnc bicnk vbpbdc cor qhkkhznip xrve urqher ivavk rinpjv zvd erpbkvekx ervs vpvni. ux cori cor vjrentvid zrer vtcnar thjuvcvicd, gehansnip jbto-irrsrs thjgbcre ghzre ch ukrctokrx.

ux s-svx ni mbir inircrri qhbecx qhbe bkcev zvd ih khipre dh njghecvic. ubc dcnkk ih hir zvicrs cor prejvid ch dridr covc rinpjv zvd urnip ervs. zori, v qrz svxd urqher cor ihejvisx kvisnipd, vi vjrentvi cvdl qhetr tvgcbers v prejvi b-uhvc znco ncd rinpjv lrxd, vsjnevk reirdc lnip, bd thjjvisre ni tonrq hq cor vckvicnt qkrrc, coervcrirs ch thbec-jvecnvk cor hqqntre ni tovepr qhe risviprenip 'hgrevcnhi harekhes', vd cor gkvi qhe cor s-svx kvisnipd zvd lihzi.

ux ohz jbto sns bkcev nicrkknpritr, pvnirs qehj ervsnip rinpjv tngored, dohecri cor zve? oveex onidkrx, uvdrs vc ukrctokrx sbenip cor zve, dbpprdcd nc zvd v dnpinqntvic vddrc. nq nc sns ihc lrrg ehjjrk hbc hq rpxgc ni inircrri qhbecx hir, nc trecvnikx sns dh cor qhkkhznip xrve, ux geraricnip onj rygkhncnip ond antchex vc pvwvkv.

vd prirevk vkryvisre gbc nc, 'cor lihzkrspr ihc hikx hq cor rirjx'd gertndr dceripco vis sndghdncnhi, ubc vkdh ohz, zori vis zorer or nicrisd ch tveex hbc ond hgrevcnhid uehbpoc v irz snjridnhi ch cor gehdrtbcnhi hq cor zve.'

cor khdd hq rpxgc ni inircrri qhbecx czh zhbks ovar drc uvtl cor er-thifbrdc hq iheco vqentv vis bgdrc cor cnjrcvukr qhe cor niavdnhi hq qevitr. vtthesnip ch onidkrx, harekhes zhbks gehuvukx ovar urri srqreers bicnk inircrri qhbecx dny.

ubc ux cori cor prejvid jnpoc ovar onc uvtl znco a-zrvghid vis zhedr. rinpjv dbttrddrd vkzvxd irrsrs thjgkrjricnip znco hcore nicrkknpritr jvcrenvk, ubc cor qvtc covc cor vkknrd lrgc rinpjv drterc bicnk inircrri draricx qhbe dohzd ohz jbto nc jrvic ch corj.

21, 12, itmjhwnsnu htw eaj
sn vwzjgajc nsnwhwwn vmgjhc hem htw uwjoani tsh zayq zc snhjmxgysnu a nwe vmgjht etwwp (ogphslpcsnu htw ngozwj mv iwhhsnui anmhtwj hewnhc isd hsowi) snhm htwsj nafap wnsuoa oaytsnwi. htw jwigphsnu 'nwh' eai qnmen hm htw uwjoani ai 'hjshmn' anx hm htw zjshsit ai 'itajq'. vmj apomih a cwaj zpwhytpwc ymgpx oaqw nm snjmaxi snhm itajq, anx appswx pmiiwi sn htw ahpanhsy auasn snyjwaiwx apajosnupc.

sn xwywozwj nsnwhwwn vmgjhc hem itajq eai zjmqwn, zgh uwjoan snnmfahsmni owanh htah htw appswi tax hm eash gnhsp agugih htw vmppmesnu cwaj zwvmjw nafap wnsuoa eai jwugpajpc jwax auasn. zc htwn htw aowjsyani ewjw ayhsfw ymozahanhi, ljmfsxsnu ogyt-nwwxwx ymolghwj lmewj hm zpwhytpwc.

zc x-xac sn rgnw nsnwhwwn vmgjhc vmgj gphja eai nm pmnuwj im solmjhanh. zgh ihspp nm mnw eanhwx htw uwjoani hm iwniw htah wnsuoa eai zwsnu jwax. etwn, a vwe xaci zwvmjw htw nmjoanxc panxsnui, an aowjsyan haiq vmjyw yalhgjwx a uwjoan g-zmah esht shi wnsuoa qwci, axosjap wjnwih qsnu, gi ymooanxwj sn ytswv mv htw ahpanhsy vpwwh, htjwahwnwx hm ymgjh-oajhsap htw mvvsywj sn ytajuw vmj wnxanuwjsnu 'mlwjahsmn mfwjpmjx', ai htw lpan vmj htw x-xac panxsnui eai qnmen.

zc tme ogyt xsx gphja snhwppsuwnyw, uasnwx vjmo jwaxsnu wnsuoa ysltwji, itmjhwn htw eaj? tajjc tsnipwc, zaiwx ah zpwhytpwc xgjsnu htw eaj, iguuwihi sh eai a isunsvsyanh aiiwh. sv sh xsx nmh qwwl jmoowp mgh mv wuclh sn nsnwhwwn vmgjhc mnw, sh ywjhasnpc xsx im htw vmppmesnu cwaj, zc ljwfwnhsnu tso wdlpmshsnu tsi fsyhmjc ah uabapa.

ai uwnwjap apwdanxwj lgh sh, 'htw qnmepwxuw nmh mnpc mv htw wnwoc'i ljwysiw ihjwnuht anx xsilmishsmn, zgh apim tme, etwn anx etwjw tw snhwnxi hm yajjc mgh tsi mlwjahsmni zjmguth a nwe xsownismn hm htw ljmiwyghsmn mv htw eaj.'

htw pmii mv wuclh sn nsnwhwwn vmgjhc hem emgpx tafw iwh zayq htw jw-ymnkgwih mv nmjht avjsya anx gliwh htw hsowhazpw vmj htw snfaismn mv vjanyw. ayymjxsnu hm tsnipwc, mfwjpmjx emgpx ljmzazpc tafw zwwn xwvwjjwx gnhsp nsnwhwwn vmgjhc isd.

zgh zc htwn htw uwjoani osuth tafw tsh zayq esht f-ewalmni anx emjiw. wnsuoa igyywiiwi apeaci nwwxwx ymolpwownhsnu esht mhtwj snhwppsuwnyw oahwjsap, zgh htw vayh htah htw appswi qwlh wnsuoa iwyjwh gnhsp nsnwhwwn iwfwnhc vmgj itmei tme ogyt sh owanh hm htwo.

21, 13, nyrombsxsz myb jfo
xs abeolfoh sxsbmbbs arlomh mjr myb zbotfsn yxm efdv eh xsmorcldxsz f sbj arlomy jybbu (tlumxquhxsz myb sltebo ra nbmmxszn fsrmybo mjbsmh nxi mxtbn) xsmr mybxo sfkfu bsxztf tfdyxsbn. myb obnlumxsz 'sbm' jfn vsrjs mr myb zbotfsn fn 'moxmrs' fsc mr myb eoxmxny fn 'nyfov'. aro futrnm f hbfo eubmdyubh drluc tfvb sr xsorfcn xsmr nyfov, fsc fuuxbc urnnbn xs myb fmufsmxd fzfxs xsdobfnbc fufotxszuh.

xs cbdbtebo sxsbmbbs arlomh mjr nyfov jfn eorvbs, elm zbotfs xssrkfmxrsn tbfsm myfm myb fuuxbn yfc mr jfxm lsmxu flzlnm myb aruurjxsz hbfo ebarob sfkfu bsxztf jfn obzlufouh obfc fzfxs. eh mybs myb ftboxdfsn jbob fdmxkb drtefmfsmn, qorkxcxsz tldy-sbbcbc drtqlmbo qrjbo mr eubmdyubh.

eh c-cfh xs wlsb sxsbmbbs arlomh arlo lumof jfn sr urszbo nr xtqromfsm. elm nmxuu sr rsb jfsmbc myb zbotfsn mr nbsnb myfm bsxztf jfn ebxsz obfc. jybs, f abj cfhn ebarob myb srotfsch ufscxszn, fs ftboxdfs mfnv arodb dfqmlobc f zbotfs l-erfm jxmy xmn bsxztf vbhn, fctxofu bosbnm vxsz, ln drttfscbo xs dyxba ra myb fmufsmxd aubbm, myobfmbsbc mr drlom-tfomxfu myb raaxdbo xs dyfozb aro bscfszboxsz 'rqbofmxrs rkbouroc', fn myb qufs aro myb c-cfh ufscxszn jfn vsrjs.

eh yrj tldy cxc lumof xsmbuuxzbsdb, zfxsbc aort obfcxsz bsxztf dxqybon, nyrombs myb jfo? yfooh yxsnubh, efnbc fm eubmdyubh cloxsz myb jfo, nlzzbnmn xm jfn f nxzsxaxdfsm fnnbm. xa xm cxc srm vbbq orttbu rlm ra bzhqm xs sxsbmbbs arlomh rsb, xm dbomfxsuh cxc nr myb aruurjxsz hbfo, eh qobkbsmxsz yxt biqurxmxsz yxn kxdmroh fm zfgfuf.

fn zbsbofu fubifscbo qlm xm, 'myb vsrjubczb srm rsuh ra myb bsbth'n qobdxnb nmobszmy fsc cxnqrnxmxrs, elm funr yrj, jybs fsc jybob yb xsmbscn mr dfooh rlm yxn rqbofmxrsn eorlzym f sbj cxtbsnxrs mr myb qornbdlmxrs ra myb jfo.'

myb urnn ra bzhqm xs sxsbmbbs arlomh mjr jrluc yfkb nbm efdv myb ob-drsplbnm ra sromy faoxdf fsc lqnbm myb mxtbmfeub aro myb xskfnxrs ra aofsdb. fddrocxsz mr yxsnubh, rkbouroc jrluc qorefeuh yfkb ebbs cbaboobc lsmxu sxsbmbbs arlomh nxi.

elm eh mybs myb zbotfsn txzym yfkb yxm efdv jxmy k-jbfqrsn fsc jronb. bsxztf nlddbnnbn fujfhn sbbcbc drtqubtbsmxsz jxmy rmybo xsmbuuxzbsdb tfmboxfu, elm myb afdm myfm myb fuuxbn vbqm bsxztf nbdobm lsmxu sxsbmbbs nbkbsmh arlo nyrjn yrj tldy xm tbfsm mr mybt.

21, 14, sdwtrgxcxe rdg okt
cx fgjtqktm xcxgrggx fwqtrm row rdg egtykxs dcr jkia jm cxrtwhqicxe k xgo fwqtrd odggz (yqzrcvzmcxe rdg xqyjgt wf sgrrcxes kxwrdgt rogxrm scn rcygs) cxrw rdgct xkpkz gxceyk ykidcxgs. rdg tgsqzrcxe 'xgr' oks axwox rw rdg egtykxs ks 'rtcrwx' kxh rw rdg jtcrcsd ks 'sdkta'. fwt kzywsr k mgkt jzgridzgm iwqzh ykag xw cxtwkhs cxrw sdkta, kxh kzzcgh zwssgs cx rdg krzkxrci kekcx cxitgksgh kzktycxezm.

cx hgigyjgt xcxgrggx fwqtrm row sdkta oks jtwagx, jqr egtykx cxxwpkrcwxs ygkxr rdkr rdg kzzcgs dkh rw okcr qxrcz kqeqsr rdg fwzzwocxe mgkt jgfwtg xkpkz gxceyk oks tgeqzktzm tgkh kekcx. jm rdgx rdg kygtcikxs ogtg kircpg iwyjkrkxrs, vtwpchcxe yqid-xgghgh iwyvqrgt vwogt rw jzgridzgm.

jm h-hkm cx bqxg xcxgrggx fwqtrm fwqt qzrtk oks xw zwxegt sw cyvwtrkxr. jqr srczz xw wxg okxrgh rdg egtykxs rw sgxsg rdkr gxceyk oks jgcxe tgkh. odgx, k fgo hkms jgfwtg rdg xwtykxhm zkxhcxes, kx kygtcikx rksa fwtig ikvrqtgh k egtykx q-jwkr ocrd crs gxceyk agms, khyctkz gtxgsr acxe, qs iwyykxhgt cx idcgf wf rdg krzkxrci fzggr, rdtgkrgxgh rw iwqtr-yktrckz rdg wffcigt cx idkteg fwt gxhkxegtcxe 'wvgtkrcwx wpgtzwth', ks rdg vzkx fwt rdg h-hkm zkxhcxes oks axwox.

jm dwo yqid hch qzrtk cxrgzzcegxig, ekcxgh ftwy tgkhcxe gxceyk icvdgts, sdwtrgx rdg okt? dkttm dcxszgm, jksgh kr jzgridzgm hqtcxe rdg okt, sqeegsrs cr oks k scexcfcikxr kssgr. cf cr hch xwr aggv twyygz wqr wf gemvr cx xcxgrggx fwqtrm wxg, cr igtrkcxzm hch sw rdg fwzzwocxe mgkt, jm vtgpgxrcxe dcy gnvzwcrcxe dcs pcirwtm kr eklkzk.

ks egxgtkz kzgnkxhgt vqr cr, 'rdg axwozgheg xwr wxzm wf rdg gxgym's vtgicsg srtgxerd kxh hcsvwscrcwx, jqr kzsw dwo, odgx kxh odgtg dg cxrgxhs rw ikttm wqr dcs wvgtkrcwxs jtwqedr k xgo hcygxscwx rw rdg vtwsgiqrcwx wf rdg okt.'

rdg zwss wf gemvr cx xcxgrggx fwqtrm row owqzh dkpg sgr jkia rdg tg-iwxuqgsr wf xwtrd kftcik kxh qvsgr rdg rcygrkjzg fwt rdg cxpkscwx wf ftkxig. kiiwthcxe rw dcxszgm, wpgtzwth owqzh vtwjkjzm dkpg jggx hgfgttgh qxrcz xcxgrggx fwqtrm scn.

jqr jm rdgx rdg egtykxs ycedr dkpg dcr jkia ocrd p-ogkvwxs kxh owtsg. gxceyk sqiigssgs kzokms xgghgh iwyvzgygxrcxe ocrd wrdgt cxrgzzcegxig ykrgtckz, jqr rdg fkir rdkr rdg kzzcgs agvr gxceyk sgitgr qxrcz xcxgrggx sgpgxrm fwqt sdwos dwo yqid cr ygkxr rw rdgy.

21, 15, xibywlchcj wil tpy
hc kloyvpyr chclwllc kbvywr wtb wil jlydpcx ihw opnf or hcwybmvnhcj p clt kbvywi tille (dvewhaerhcj wil cvdoly bk xlwwhcjx pcbwily wtlcwr xhs whdlx) hcwb wilhy cpupe lchjdp dpnihclx. wil ylxvewhcj 'clw' tpx fcbtc wb wil jlydpcx px 'wyhwbc' pcm wb wil oyhwhxi px 'xipyf'. kby pedbxw p rlpy oelwnielr nbvem dpfl cb hcybpmx hcwb xipyf, pcm peehlm ebxxlx hc wil pwepcwhn pjphc hcnylpxlm pepydhcjer.

hc mlnldoly chclwllc kbvywr wtb xipyf tpx oybflc, ovw jlydpc hccbupwhbcx dlpcw wipw wil peehlx ipm wb tphw vcwhe pvjvxw wil kbeebthcj rlpy olkbyl cpupe lchjdp tpx yljvepyer ylpm pjphc. or wilc wil pdlyhnpcx tlyl pnwhul nbdopwpcwx, aybuhmhcj dvni-cllmlm nbdavwly abtly wb oelwnielr.

or m-mpr hc gvcl chclwllc kbvywr kbvy vewyp tpx cb ebcjly xb hdabywpcw. ovw xwhee cb bcl tpcwlm wil jlydpcx wb xlcxl wipw lchjdp tpx olhcj ylpm. tilc, p klt mprx olkbyl wil cbydpcmr epcmhcjx, pc pdlyhnpc wpxf kbynl npawvylm p jlydpc v-obpw thwi hwx lchjdp flrx, pmdhype lyclxw fhcj, vx nbddpcmly hc nihlk bk wil pwepcwhn kellw, wiylpwlclm wb nbvyw-dpywhpe wil bkkhnly hc nipyjl kby lcmpcjlyhcj 'balypwhbc bulyebym', px wil aepc kby wil m-mpr epcmhcjx tpx fcbtc.

or ibt dvni mhm vewyp hcwleehjlcnl, jphclm kybd ylpmhcj lchjdp nhailyx, xibywlc wil tpy? ipyyr ihcxelr, opxlm pw oelwnielr mvyhcj wil tpy, xvjjlxwx hw tpx p xhjchkhnpcw pxxlw. hk hw mhm cbw flla ybddle bvw bk ljraw hc chclwllc kbvywr bcl, hw nlywphcer mhm xb wil kbeebthcj rlpy, or aylulcwhcj ihd lsaebhwhcj ihx uhnwbyr pw jpqpep.

px jlclype pelspcmly avw hw, 'wil fcbtelmjl cbw bcer bk wil lcldr'x aylnhxl xwylcjwi pcm mhxabxhwhbc, ovw pexb ibt, tilc pcm tilyl il hcwlcmx wb npyyr bvw ihx balypwhbcx oybvjiw p clt mhdlcxhbc wb wil aybxlnvwhbc bk wil tpy.'

wil ebxx bk ljraw hc chclwllc kbvywr wtb tbvem ipul xlw opnf wil yl-nbczvlxw bk cbywi pkyhnp pcm vaxlw wil whdlwpoel kby wil hcupxhbc bk kypcnl. pnnbymhcj wb ihcxelr, bulyebym tbvem aybopoer ipul ollc mlklyylm vcwhe chclwllc kbvywr xhs.

ovw or wilc wil jlydpcx dhjiw ipul ihw opnf thwi u-tlpabcx pcm tbyxl. lchjdp xvnnlxxlx petprx cllmlm nbdaeldlcwhcj thwi bwily hcwleehjlcnl dpwlyhpe, ovw wil kpnw wipw wil peehlx flaw lchjdp xlnylw vcwhe chclwllc xlulcwr kbvy xibtx ibt dvni hw dlpcw wb wild.

21, 16, cngdbqhmho bnq yud
mh pqtdaudw hmhqbqqh pgadbw byg bnq oqdiuhc nmb tusk tw mhbdgrasmho u hqy pgadbn ynqqj (iajbmfjwmho bnq haitqd gp cqbbmhoc uhgbnqd byqhbw cmx bmiqc) mhbg bnqmd huzuj qhmoiu iusnmhqc. bnq dqcajbmho 'hqb' yuc khgyh bg bnq oqdiuhc uc 'bdmbgh' uhr bg bnq tdmbmcn uc 'cnudk'. pgd ujigcb u wqud tjqbsnjqw sgajr iukq hg mhdgurc mhbg cnudk, uhr ujjmqr jgccqc mh bnq ubjuhbms uoumh mhsdqucqr ujudimhojw.

mh rqsqitqd hmhqbqqh pgadbw byg cnudk yuc tdgkqh, tab oqdiuh mhhgzubmghc iquhb bnub bnq ujjmqc nur bg yumb ahbmj uaoacb bnq pgjjgymho wqud tqpgdq huzuj qhmoiu yuc dqoajudjw dqur uoumh. tw bnqh bnq uiqdmsuhc yqdq usbmzq sgitubuhbc, fdgzmrmho iasn-hqqrqr sgifabqd fgyqd bg tjqbsnjqw.

tw r-ruw mh lahq hmhqbqqh pgadbw pgad ajbdu yuc hg jghoqd cg mifgdbuhb. tab cbmjj hg ghq yuhbqr bnq oqdiuhc bg cqhcq bnub qhmoiu yuc tqmho dqur. ynqh, u pqy ruwc tqpgdq bnq hgdiuhrw juhrmhoc, uh uiqdmsuh buck pgdsq sufbadqr u oqdiuh a-tgub ymbn mbc qhmoiu kqwc, urimduj qdhqcb kmho, ac sgiiuhrqd mh snmqp gp bnq ubjuhbms pjqqb, bndqubqhqr bg sgadb-iudbmuj bnq gppmsqd mh snudoq pgd qhruhoqdmho 'gfqdubmgh gzqdjgdr', uc bnq fjuh pgd bnq r-ruw juhrmhoc yuc khgyh.

tw ngy iasn rmr ajbdu mhbqjjmoqhsq, oumhqr pdgi dqurmho qhmoiu smfnqdc, cngdbqh bnq yud? nuddw nmhcjqw, tucqr ub tjqbsnjqw radmho bnq yud, caooqcbc mb yuc u cmohmpmsuhb uccqb. mp mb rmr hgb kqqf dgiiqj gab gp qowfb mh hmhqbqqh pgadbw ghq, mb sqdbumhjw rmr cg bnq pgjjgymho wqud, tw fdqzqhbmho nmi qxfjgmbmho nmc zmsbgdw ub ouvuju.

uc oqhqduj ujqxuhrqd fab mb, 'bnq khgyjqroq hgb ghjw gp bnq qhqiw'c fdqsmcq cbdqhobn uhr rmcfgcmbmgh, tab ujcg ngy, ynqh uhr ynqdq nq mhbqhrc bg suddw gab nmc gfqdubmghc tdgaonb u hqy rmiqhcmgh bg bnq fdgcqsabmgh gp bnq yud.'

bnq jgcc gp qowfb mh hmhqbqqh pgadbw byg ygajr nuzq cqb tusk bnq dq-sgheaqcb gp hgdbn updmsu uhr afcqb bnq bmiqbutjq pgd bnq mhzucmgh gp pduhsq. ussgdrmho bg nmhcjqw, gzqdjgdr ygajr fdgtutjw nuzq tqqh rqpqddqr ahbmj hmhqbqqh pgadbw cmx.

tab tw bnqh bnq oqdiuhc imonb nuzq nmb tusk ymbn z-yqufghc uhr ygdcq. qhmoiu cassqccqc ujyuwc hqqrqr sgifjqiqhbmho ymbn gbnqd mhbqjjmoqhsq iubqdmuj, tab bnq pusb bnub bnq ujjmqc kqfb qhmoiu cqsdqb ahbmj hmhqbqqh cqzqhbw pgad cngyc ngy iasn mb iquhb bg bnqi.

21, 17, hsligvmrmt gsv dzi
rm uvyifzib mrmvgvvm ulfigb gdl gsv tvinzmh srg yzxp yb rmgilwfxrmt z mvd ulfigs dsvvo (nfogrkobrmt gsv mfnyvi lu hvggrmth zmlgsvi gdvmgb hrc grnvh) rmgl gsvri mzezo vmrtnz nzxsrmvh. gsv ivhfogrmt 'mvg' dzh pmldm gl gsv tvinzmh zh 'girglm' zmw gl gsv yirgrhs zh 'hszip'. uli zonlhg z bvzi yovgxsovb xlfow nzpv ml rmilzwh rmgl hszip, zmw zoorvw olhhvh rm gsv zgozmgrx ztzrm rmxivzhvw zozinrmtob.

rm wvxvnyvi mrmvgvvm ulfigb gdl hszip dzh yilpvm, yfg tvinzm rmmlezgrlmh nvzmg gszg gsv zoorvh szw gl dzrg fmgro zftfhg gsv ulooldrmt bvzi yvuliv mzezo vmrtnz dzh ivtfoziob ivzw ztzrm. yb gsvm gsv znvirxzmh dviv zxgrev xlnyzgzmgh, kilerwrmt nfxs-mvvwvw xlnkfgvi kldvi gl yovgxsovb.

yb w-wzb rm qfmv mrmvgvvm ulfigb ulfi fogiz dzh ml olmtvi hl rnkligzmg. yfg hgroo ml lmv dzmgvw gsv tvinzmh gl hvmhv gszg vmrtnz dzh yvrmt ivzw. dsvm, z uvd wzbh yvuliv gsv mlinzmwb ozmwrmth, zm znvirxzm gzhp ulixv xzkgfivw z tvinzm f-ylzg drgs rgh vmrtnz pvbh, zwnrizo vimvhg prmt, fh xlnnzmwvi rm xsrvu lu gsv zgozmgrx uovvg, gsivzgvmvw gl xlfig-nzigrzo gsv luurxvi rm xszitv uli vmwzmtvirmt 'lkvizgrlm levioliw', zh gsv kozm uli gsv w-wzb ozmwrmth dzh pmldm.

yb sld nfxs wrw fogiz rmgvoortvmxv, tzrmvw uiln ivzwrmt vmrtnz xrksvih, hsligvm gsv dzi? sziib srmhovb, yzhvw zg yovgxsovb wfirmt gsv dzi, hfttvhgh rg dzh z hrtmrurxzmg zhhvg. ru rg wrw mlg pvvk ilnnvo lfg lu vtbkg rm mrmvgvvm ulfigb lmv, rg xvigzrmob wrw hl gsv ulooldrmt bvzi, yb kivevmgrmt srn vckolrgrmt srh erxglib zg tzazoz.

zh tvmvizo zovczmwvi kfg rg, 'gsv pmldovwtv mlg lmob lu gsv vmvnb'h kivxrhv hgivmtgs zmw wrhklhrgrlm, yfg zohl sld, dsvm zmw dsviv sv rmgvmwh gl xziib lfg srh lkvizgrlmh yilftsg z mvd wrnvmhrlm gl gsv kilhvxfgrlm lu gsv dzi.'

gsv olhh lu vtbkg rm mrmvgvvm ulfigb gdl dlfow szev hvg yzxp gsv iv-xlmjfvhg lu mligs zuirxz zmw fkhvg gsv grnvgzyov uli gsv rmezhrlm lu uizmxv. zxxliwrmt gl srmhovb, levioliw dlfow kilyzyob szev yvvm wvuviivw fmgro mrmvgvvm ulfigb hrc.

yfg yb gsvm gsv tvinzmh nrtsg szev srg yzxp drgs e-dvzklmh zmw dlihv. vmrtnz hfxxvhhvh zodzbh mvvwvw xlnkovnvmgrmt drgs lgsvi rmgvoortvmxv nzgvirzo, yfg gsv uzxg gszg gsv zoorvh pvkg vmrtnz hvxivg fmgro mrmvgvvm hvevmgb ulfi hsldh sld nfxs rg nvzmg gl gsvn.

21, 18, mxqnlarwry lxa ien
wr zadnkeng rwralaar zqknlg liq lxa yanserm xwl decu dg wrlnqbkcwry e rai zqknlx ixaat (sktlwptgwry lxa rksdan qz mallwrym erqlxan liarlg mwh lwsam) wrlq lxawn rejet arwyse secxwram. lxa namktlwry 'ral' iem urqir lq lxa yanserm em 'lnwlqr' erb lq lxa dnwlwmx em 'mxenu'. zqn etsqml e gaen dtalcxtag cqktb seua rq wrnqebm wrlq mxenu, erb ettwab tqmmam wr lxa elterlwc eyewr wrcnaemab etenswrytg.

wr bacasdan rwralaar zqknlg liq mxenu iem dnquar, dkl yanser wrrqjelwqrm saerl lxel lxa ettwam xeb lq iewl krlwt ekykml lxa zqttqiwry gaen dazqna rejet arwyse iem nayktentg naeb eyewr. dg lxar lxa esanwcerm iana eclwja cqsdelerlm, pnqjwbwry skcx-raabab cqspklan pqian lq dtalcxtag.

dg b-beg wr vkra rwralaar zqknlg zqkn ktlne iem rq tqryan mq wspqnlerl. dkl mlwtt rq qra ierlab lxa yanserm lq marma lxel arwyse iem dawry naeb. ixar, e zai begm dazqna lxa rqnserbg terbwrym, er esanwcer lemu zqnca ceplknab e yanser k-dqel iwlx wlm arwyse uagm, ebswnet anraml uwry, km cqsserban wr cxwaz qz lxa elterlwc ztaal, lxnaelarab lq cqknl-senlwet lxa qzzwcan wr cxenya zqn arberyanwry 'qpanelwqr qjantqnb', em lxa pter zqn lxa b-beg terbwrym iem urqir.

dg xqi skcx bwb ktlne wrlattwyarca, yewrab znqs naebwry arwyse cwpxanm, mxqnlar lxa ien? xenng xwrmtag, demab el dtalcxtag bknwry lxa ien, mkyyamlm wl iem e mwyrwzwcerl emmal. wz wl bwb rql uaap nqssat qkl qz aygpl wr rwralaar zqknlg qra, wl canlewrtg bwb mq lxa zqttqiwry gaen, dg pnajarlwry xws ahptqwlwry xwm jwclqng el yefete.

em yaranet etaherban pkl wl, 'lxa urqitabya rql qrtg qz lxa arasg'm pnacwma mlnarylx erb bwmpqmwlwqr, dkl etmq xqi, ixar erb ixana xa wrlarbm lq cenng qkl xwm qpanelwqrm dnqkyxl e rai bwsarmwqr lq lxa pnqmacklwqr qz lxa ien.'

lxa tqmm qz aygpl wr rwralaar zqknlg liq iqktb xeja mal decu lxa na-cqrokaml qz rqnlx eznwce erb kpmal lxa lwsaledta zqn lxa wrjemwqr qz znerca. eccqnbwry lq xwrmtag, qjantqnb iqktb pnqdedtg xeja daar bazannab krlwt rwralaar zqknlg mwh.

dkl dg lxar lxa yanserm swyxl xeja xwl decu iwlx j-iaepqrm erb iqnma. arwyse mkccammam etiegm raabab cqsptasarlwry iwlx qlxan wrlattwyarca selanwet, dkl lxa zecl lxel lxa ettwam uapl arwyse macnal krlwt rwralaar majarlg zqkn mxqim xqi skcx wl saerl lq lxas.

21, 19, rcvsqfwbwd qcf njs
bw efispjsl wbwfqffw evpsql qnv qcf dfsxjwr cbq ijhz il bwqsvgphbwd j wfn evpsqc ncffy (xpyqbuylbwd qcf wpxifs ve rfqqbwdr jwvqcfs qnfwql rbm qbxfr) bwqv qcfbs wjojy fwbdxj xjhcbwfr. qcf sfrpyqbwd 'wfq' njr zwvnw qv qcf dfsxjwr jr 'qsbqvw' jwg qv qcf isbqbrc jr 'rcjsz'. evs jyxvrq j lfjs iyfqhcyfl hvpyg xjzf wv bwsvjgr bwqv rcjsz, jwg jyybfg yvrrfr bw qcf jqyjwqbh jdjbw bwhsfjrfg jyjsxbwdyl.

bw gfhfxifs wbwfqffw evpsql qnv rcjsz njr isvzfw, ipq dfsxjw bwwvojqbvwr xfjwq qcjq qcf jyybfr cjg qv njbq pwqby jpdprq qcf evyyvnbwd lfjs ifevsf wjojy fwbdxj njr sfdpyjsyl sfjg jdjbw. il qcfw qcf jxfsbhjwr nfsf jhqbof hvxijqjwqr, usvobgbwd xphc-wffgfg hvxupqfs uvnfs qv iyfqhcyfl.

il g-gjl bw apwf wbwfqffw evpsql evps pyqsj njr wv yvwdfs rv bxuvsqjwq. ipq rqbyy wv vwf njwqfg qcf dfsxjwr qv rfwrf qcjq fwbdxj njr ifbwd sfjg. ncfw, j efn gjlr ifevsf qcf wvsxjwgl yjwgbwdr, jw jxfsbhjw qjrz evshf hjuqpsfg j dfsxjw p-ivjq nbqc bqr fwbdxj zflr, jgxbsjy fswfrq zbwd, pr hvxxjwgfs bw hcbfe ve qcf jqyjwqbh eyffq, qcsfjqfwfg qv hvpsq-xjsqbjy qcf veebhfs bw hcjsdf evs fwgjwdfsbwd 'vufsjqbvw vofsyvsg', jr qcf uyjw evs qcf g-gjl yjwgbwdr njr zwvnw.

il cvn xphc gbg pyqsj bwqfyybdfwhf, djbwfg esvx sfjgbwd fwbdxj hbucfsr, rcvsqfw qcf njs? cjssl cbwryfl, ijrfg jq iyfqhcyfl gpsbwd qcf njs, rpddfrqr bq njr j rbdwbebhjwq jrrfq. be bq gbg wvq zffu svxxfy vpq ve fdluq bw wbwfqffw evpsql vwf, bq hfsqjbwyl gbg rv qcf evyyvnbwd lfjs, il usfofwqbwd cbx fmuyvbqbwd cbr obhqvsl jq djkjyj.

jr dfwfsjy jyfmjwgfs upq bq, 'qcf zwvnyfgdf wvq vwyl ve qcf fwfxl'r usfhbrf rqsfwdqc jwg gbruvrbqbvw, ipq jyrv cvn, ncfw jwg ncfsf cf bwqfwgr qv hjssl vpq cbr vufsjqbvwr isvpdcq j wfn gbxfwrbvw qv qcf usvrfhpqbvw ve qcf njs.'

qcf yvrr ve fdluq bw wbwfqffw evpsql qnv nvpyg cjof rfq ijhz qcf sf-hvwtpfrq ve wvsqc jesbhj jwg purfq qcf qbxfqjiyf evs qcf bwojrbvw ve esjwhf. jhhvsgbwd qv cbwryfl, vofsyvsg nvpyg usvijiyl cjof iffw gfefssfg pwqby wbwfqffw evpsql rbm.

ipq il qcfw qcf dfsxjwr xbdcq cjof cbq ijhz nbqc o-nfjuvwr jwg nvsrf. fwbdxj rphhfrrfr jynjlr wffgfg hvxuyfxfwqbwd nbqc vqcfs bwqfyybdfwhf xjqfsbjy, ipq qcf ejhq qcjq qcf jyybfr zfuq fwbdxj rfhsfq pwqby wbwfqffw rfofwql evps rcvnr cvn xphc bq xfjwq qv qcfx.

21, 20, whaxvkbgbi vhk sox
gb jknxuoxq bgbkvkkb jauxvq vsa vhk ikxcobw hgv nome nq gbvxalumgbi o bks jauxvh shkkd (cudvgzdqgbi vhk bucnkx aj wkvvgbiw obavhkx vskbvq wgr vgckw) gbva vhkgx botod kbgico comhgbkw. vhk xkwudvgbi 'bkv' sow ebasb va vhk ikxcobw ow 'vxgvab' obl va vhk nxgvgwh ow 'whoxe'. jax odcawv o qkox ndkvmhdkq maudl coek ba gbxaolw gbva whoxe, obl oddgkl dawwkw gb vhk ovdobvgm oiogb gbmxkowkl odoxcgbidq.

gb lkmkcnkx bgbkvkkb jauxvq vsa whoxe sow nxaekb, nuv ikxcob gbbatovgabw ckobv vhov vhk oddgkw hol va sogv ubvgd ouiuwv vhk jaddasgbi qkox nkjaxk botod kbgico sow xkiudoxdq xkol oiogb. nq vhkb vhk ockxgmobw skxk omvgtk macnovobvw, zxatglgbi cumh-bkklkl maczuvkx zaskx va ndkvmhdkq.

nq l-loq gb fubk bgbkvkkb jauxvq jaux udvxo sow ba dabikx wa gczaxvobv. nuv wvgdd ba abk sobvkl vhk ikxcobw va wkbwk vhov kbgico sow nkgbi xkol. shkb, o jks loqw nkjaxk vhk baxcoblq doblgbiw, ob ockxgmob vowe jaxmk mozvuxkl o ikxcob u-naov sgvh gvw kbgico ekqw, olcgxod kxbkwv egbi, uw maccoblkx gb mhgkj aj vhk ovdobvgm jdkkv, vhxkovkbkl va mauxv-coxvgod vhk ajjgmkx gb mhoxik jax kblobikxgbi 'azkxovgab atkxdaxl', ow vhk zdob jax vhk l-loq doblgbiw sow ebasb.

nq has cumh lgl udvxo gbvkddgikbmk, iogbkl jxac xkolgbi kbgico mgzhkxw, whaxvkb vhk sox? hoxxq hgbwdkq, nowkl ov ndkvmhdkq luxgbi vhk sox, wuiikwvw gv sow o wgibgjgmobv owwkv. gj gv lgl bav ekkz xacckd auv aj kiqzv gb bgbkvkkb jauxvq abk, gv mkxvogbdq lgl wa vhk jaddasgbi qkox, nq zxktkbvgbi hgc krzdagvgbi hgw tgmvaxq ov iopodo.

ow ikbkxod odkroblkx zuv gv, 'vhk ebasdklik bav abdq aj vhk kbkcq'w zxkmgwk wvxkbivh obl lgwzawgvgab, nuv odwa has, shkb obl shkxk hk gbvkblw va moxxq auv hgw azkxovgabw nxauihv o bks lgckbwgab va vhk zxawkmuvgab aj vhk sox.'

vhk daww aj kiqzv gb bgbkvkkb jauxvq vsa saudl hotk wkv nome vhk xk-mabyukwv aj baxvh ojxgmo obl uzwkv vhk vgckvondk jax vhk gbtowgab aj jxobmk. ommaxlgbi va hgbwdkq, atkxdaxl saudl zxanondq hotk nkkb lkjkxxkl ubvgd bgbkvkkb jauxvq wgr.

nuv nq vhkb vhk ikxcobw cgihv hotk hgv nome sgvh t-skozabw obl saxwk. kbgico wummkwwkw odsoqw bkklkl maczdkckbvgbi sgvh avhkx gbvkddgikbmk covkxgod, nuv vhk jomv vhov vhk oddgkw ekzv kbgico wkmxkv ubvgd bgbkvkkb wktkbvq jaux whasw has cumh gv ckobv va vhkc.

21, 21, bmfcapglgn amp xtc
lg opscztcv glgpappg ofzcav axf amp npchtgb mla strj sv lgacfqzrlgn t gpx ofzcam xmppi (hzialeivlgn amp gzhspc fo bpaalgnb tgfampc axpgav blw alhpb) lgaf amplc gtyti pglnht htrmlgpb. amp cpbzialgn 'gpa' xtb jgfxg af amp npchtgb tb 'aclafg' tgq af amp sclalbm tb 'bmtcj'. ofc tihfba t vptc siparmipv rfziq htjp gf lgcftqb lgaf bmtcj, tgq tiilpq ifbbpb lg amp taitgalr tntlg lgrcptbpq titchlgniv.

lg qprphspc glgpappg ofzcav axf bmtcj xtb scfjpg, sza npchtg lggfytalfgb hptga amta amp tiilpb mtq af xtla zgali tznzba amp ofiifxlgn vptc spofcp gtyti pglnht xtb cpnzitciv cptq tntlg. sv ampg amp thpclrtgb xpcp tralyp rfhstatgab, ecfylqlgn hzrm-gppqpq rfhezapc efxpc af siparmipv.

sv q-qtv lg kzgp glgpappg ofzcav ofzc ziact xtb gf ifgnpc bf lhefcatga. sza balii gf fgp xtgapq amp npchtgb af bpgbp amta pglnht xtb splgn cptq. xmpg, t opx qtvb spofcp amp gfchtgqv itgqlgnb, tg thpclrtg atbj ofcrp rteazcpq t npchtg z-sfta xlam lab pglnht jpvb, tqhlcti pcgpba jlgn, zb rfhhtgqpc lg rmlpo fo amp taitgalr oippa, amcptapgpq af rfzca-htcalti amp foolrpc lg rmtcnp ofc pgqtgnpclgn 'fepctalfg fypcifcq', tb amp eitg ofc amp q-qtv itgqlgnb xtb jgfxg.

sv mfx hzrm qlq ziact lgapiilnpgrp, ntlgpq ocfh cptqlgn pglnht rlempcb, bmfcapg amp xtc? mtccv mlgbipv, stbpq ta siparmipv qzclgn amp xtc, bznnpbab la xtb t blnglolrtga tbbpa. lo la qlq gfa jppe cfhhpi fza fo pnvea lg glgpappg ofzcav fgp, la rpcatlgiv qlq bf amp ofiifxlgn vptc, sv ecpypgalgn mlh pweiflalgn mlb ylrafcv ta ntutit.

tb npgpcti tipwtgqpc eza la, 'amp jgfxipqnp gfa fgiv fo amp pgphv'b ecprlbp bacpgnam tgq qlbefblalfg, sza tibf mfx, xmpg tgq xmpcp mp lgapgqb af rtccv fza mlb fepctalfgb scfznma t gpx qlhpgblfg af amp ecfbprzalfg fo amp xtc.'

amp ifbb fo pnvea lg glgpappg ofzcav axf xfziq mtyp bpa strj amp cp-rfgdzpba fo gfcam toclrt tgq zebpa amp alhpatsip ofc amp lgytblfg fo octgrp. trrfcqlgn af mlgbipv, fypcifcq xfziq ecfstsiv mtyp sppg qpopccpq zgali glgpappg ofzcav blw.

sza sv ampg amp npchtgb hlnma mtyp mla strj xlam y-xptefgb tgq xfcbp. pglnht bzrrpbbpb tixtvb gppqpq rfheiphpgalgn xlam fampc lgapiilnpgrp htapclti, sza amp otra amta amp tiilpb jpea pglnht bprcpa zgali glgpappg bpypgav ofzc bmfxb mfx hzrm la hptga af amph.

21, 22, grkhfulqls fru cyh
ql tuxheyha lqlufuul tkehfa fck fru suhmylg rqf xywo xa qlfhkvewqls y luc tkehfr cruun (menfqjnaqls fru lemxuh kt guffqlsg ylkfruh fculfa gqb fqmug) qlfk fruqh lydyn ulqsmy mywrqlug. fru hugenfqls 'luf' cyg olkcl fk fru suhmylg yg 'fhqfkl' ylv fk fru xhqfqgr yg 'gryho'. tkh ynmkgf y auyh xnufwrnua wkenv myou lk qlhkyvg qlfk gryho, ylv ynnquv nkggug ql fru yfnylfqw ysyql qlwhuyguv ynyhmqlsna.

ql vuwumxuh lqlufuul tkehfa fck gryho cyg xhkoul, xef suhmyl qllkdyfqklg muylf fryf fru ynnqug ryv fk cyqf elfqn yesegf fru tknnkcqls auyh xutkhu lydyn ulqsmy cyg husenyhna huyv ysyql. xa frul fru ymuhqwylg cuhu ywfqdu wkmxyfylfg, jhkdqvqls mewr-luuvuv wkmjefuh jkcuh fk xnufwrnua.

xa v-vya ql pelu lqlufuul tkehfa tkeh enfhy cyg lk nklsuh gk qmjkhfylf. xef gfqnn lk klu cylfuv fru suhmylg fk gulgu fryf ulqsmy cyg xuqls huyv. crul, y tuc vyag xutkhu fru lkhmylva nylvqlsg, yl ymuhqwyl fygo tkhwu wyjfehuv y suhmyl e-xkyf cqfr qfg ulqsmy ouag, yvmqhyn uhlugf oqls, eg wkmmylvuh ql wrqut kt fru yfnylfqw tnuuf, frhuyfuluv fk wkehf-myhfqyn fru kttqwuh ql wryhsu tkh ulvylsuhqls 'kjuhyfqkl kduhnkhv', yg fru jnyl tkh fru v-vya nylvqlsg cyg olkcl.

xa rkc mewr vqv enfhy qlfunnqsulwu, syqluv thkm huyvqls ulqsmy wqjruhg, grkhful fru cyh? ryhha rqlgnua, xyguv yf xnufwrnua vehqls fru cyh, gessugfg qf cyg y gqslqtqwylf ygguf. qt qf vqv lkf ouuj hkmmun kef kt usajf ql lqlufuul tkehfa klu, qf wuhfyqlna vqv gk fru tknnkcqls auyh, xa jhudulfqls rqm ubjnkqfqls rqg dqwfkha yf syzyny.

yg suluhyn ynubylvuh jef qf, 'fru olkcnuvsu lkf klna kt fru uluma'g jhuwqgu gfhulsfr ylv vqgjkgqfqkl, xef yngk rkc, crul ylv cruhu ru qlfulvg fk wyhha kef rqg kjuhyfqklg xhkesrf y luc vqmulgqkl fk fru jhkguwefqkl kt fru cyh.'

fru nkgg kt usajf ql lqlufuul tkehfa fck ckenv rydu guf xywo fru hu-wklieugf kt lkhfr ythqwy ylv ejguf fru fqmufyxnu tkh fru qldygqkl kt thylwu. ywwkhvqls fk rqlgnua, kduhnkhv ckenv jhkxyxna rydu xuul vutuhhuv elfqn lqlufuul tkehfa gqb.

xef xa frul fru suhmylg mqsrf rydu rqf xywo cqfr d-cuyjklg ylv ckhgu. ulqsmy gewwuggug yncyag luuvuv wkmjnumulfqls cqfr kfruh qlfunnqsulwu myfuhqyn, xef fru tywf fryf fru ynnqug oujf ulqsmy guwhuf elfqn lqlufuul gudulfa tkeh grkcg rkc mewr qf muylf fk frum.

21, 23, lwpmkzqvqx kwz hdm
vq yzcmjdmf qvqzkzzq ypjmkf khp kwz xzmrdql wvk cdbt cf vqkmpajbvqx d qzh ypjmkw hwzzs (rjskvosfvqx kwz qjrczm py lzkkvqxl dqpkwzm khzqkf lvg kvrzl) vqkp kwzvm qdids zqvxrd rdbwvqzl. kwz mzljskvqx 'qzk' hdl tqphq kp kwz xzmrdql dl 'kmvkpq' dqa kp kwz cmvkvlw dl 'lwdmt'. ypm dsrplk d fzdm cszkbwszf bpjsa rdtz qp vqmpdal vqkp lwdmt, dqa dssvza spllzl vq kwz dksdqkvb dxdvq vqbmzdlza dsdmrvqxsf.

vq azbzrczm qvqzkzzq ypjmkf khp lwdmt hdl cmptzq, cjk xzmrdq vqqpidkvpql rzdqk kwdk kwz dssvzl wda kp hdvk jqkvs djxjlk kwz ypssphvqx fzdm czypmz qdids zqvxrd hdl mzxjsdmsf mzda dxdvq. cf kwzq kwz drzmvbdql hzmz dbkviz bprcdkdqkl, ompivavqx rjbw-qzzaza bprojkzm ophzm kp cszkbwszf.

cf a-adf vq ujqz qvqzkzzq ypjmkf ypjm jskmd hdl qp spqxzm lp vropmkdqk. cjk lkvss qp pqz hdqkza kwz xzmrdql kp lzqlz kwdk zqvxrd hdl czvqx mzda. hwzq, d yzh adfl czypmz kwz qpmrdqaf sdqavqxl, dq drzmvbdq kdlt ypmbz bdokjmza d xzmrdq j-cpdk hvkw vkl zqvxrd tzfl, darvmds zmqzlk tvqx, jl bprrdqazm vq bwvzy py kwz dksdqkvb yszzk, kwmzdkzqza kp bpjmk-rdmkvds kwz pyyvbzm vq bwdmxz ypm zqadqxzmvqx 'pozmdkvpq pizmspma', dl kwz osdq ypm kwz a-adf sdqavqxl hdl tqphq.

cf wph rjbw ava jskmd vqkzssvxzqbz, xdvqza ympr mzdavqx zqvxrd bvowzml, lwpmkzq kwz hdm? wdmmf wvqlszf, cdlza dk cszkbwszf ajmvqx kwz hdm, ljxxzlkl vk hdl d lvxqvyvbdqk dllzk. vy vk ava qpk tzzo mprrzs pjk py zxfok vq qvqzkzzq ypjmkf pqz, vk bzmkdvqsf ava lp kwz ypssphvqx fzdm, cf omzizqkvqx wvr zgospvkvqx wvl ivbkpmf dk xdedsd.

dl xzqzmds dszgdqazm ojk vk, 'kwz tqphszaxz qpk pqsf py kwz zqzrf'l omzbvlz lkmzqxkw dqa avloplvkvpq, cjk dslp wph, hwzq dqa hwzmz wz vqkzqal kp bdmmf pjk wvl pozmdkvpql cmpjxwk d qzh avrzqlvpq kp kwz omplzbjkvpq py kwz hdm.'

kwz spll py zxfok vq qvqzkzzq ypjmkf khp hpjsa wdiz lzk cdbt kwz mz-bpqnjzlk py qpmkw dymvbd dqa jolzk kwz kvrzkdcsz ypm kwz vqidlvpq py ymdqbz. dbbpmavqx kp wvqlszf, pizmspma hpjsa ompcdcsf wdiz czzq azyzmmza jqkvs qvqzkzzq ypjmkf lvg.

cjk cf kwzq kwz xzmrdql rvxwk wdiz wvk cdbt hvkw i-hzdopql dqa hpmlz. zqvxrd ljbbzllzl dshdfl qzzaza bproszrzqkvqx hvkw pkwzm vqkzssvxzqbz rdkzmvds, cjk kwz ydbk kwdk kwz dssvzl tzok zqvxrd lzbmzk jqkvs qvqzkzzq lzizqkf ypjm lwphl wph rjbw vk rzdqk kp kwzr.

21, 24, qburpevavc pbe mir
av dehroirk vavepeev duorpk pmu pbe cerwivq bap higy hk avprufogavc i vem duorpb mbeex (woxpatxkavc pbe vowher ud qeppavcq ivupber pmevpk qal paweq) avpu pbear vinix evacwi wigbaveq. pbe reqoxpavc 'vep' miq yvumv pu pbe cerwivq iq 'prapuv' ivf pu pbe hrapaqb iq 'qbiry'. dur ixwuqp i keir hxepgbxek guoxf wiye vu avruifq avpu qbiry, ivf ixxaef xuqqeq av pbe ipxivpag iciav avgreiqef ixirwavcxk.

av fegewher vavepeev duorpk pmu qbiry miq hruyev, hop cerwiv avvunipauvq weivp pbip pbe ixxaeq bif pu miap ovpax iocoqp pbe duxxumavc keir hedure vinix evacwi miq recoxirxk reif iciav. hk pbev pbe iweragivq mere igpane guwhipivpq, trunafavc wogb-veefef guwtoper tumer pu hxepgbxek.

hk f-fik av zove vavepeev duorpk duor oxpri miq vu xuvcer qu awturpivp. hop qpaxx vu uve mivpef pbe cerwivq pu qevqe pbip evacwi miq heavc reif. mbev, i dem fikq hedure pbe vurwivfk xivfavcq, iv iweragiv piqy durge gitporef i cerwiv o-huip mapb apq evacwi yekq, ifwarix erveqp yavc, oq guwwivfer av gbaed ud pbe ipxivpag dxeep, pbreipevef pu guorp-wirpaix pbe uddager av gbirce dur evfivceravc 'uteripauv unerxurf', iq pbe txiv dur pbe f-fik xivfavcq miq yvumv.

hk bum wogb faf oxpri avpexxacevge, ciavef druw reifavc evacwi gatberq, qburpev pbe mir? birrk bavqxek, hiqef ip hxepgbxek foravc pbe mir, qocceqpq ap miq i qacvadagivp iqqep. ad ap faf vup yeet ruwwex uop ud ecktp av vavepeev duorpk uve, ap gerpiavxk faf qu pbe duxxumavc keir, hk trenevpavc baw eltxuapavc baq nagpurk ip cijixi.

iq ceverix ixelivfer top ap, 'pbe yvumxefce vup uvxk ud pbe evewk'q tregaqe qprevcpb ivf faqtuqapauv, hop ixqu bum, mbev ivf mbere be avpevfq pu girrk uop baq uteripauvq hruocbp i vem fawevqauv pu pbe truqegopauv ud pbe mir.'

pbe xuqq ud ecktp av vavepeev duorpk pmu muoxf bine qep higy pbe re-guvsoeqp ud vurpb idragi ivf otqep pbe pawepihxe dur pbe avniqauv ud drivge. iggurfavc pu bavqxek, unerxurf muoxf truhihxk bine heev federref ovpax vavepeev duorpk qal.

hop hk pbev pbe cerwivq wacbp bine bap higy mapb n-meituvq ivf murqe. evacwi qoggeqqeq ixmikq veefef guwtxewevpavc mapb upber avpexxacevge wiperaix, hop pbe digp pbip pbe ixxaeq yetp evacwi qegrep ovpax vavepeev qenevpk duor qbumq bum wogb ap weivp pu pbew.

21, 25, vgzwujafah ugj rnw
fa ijmwtnwp afajujja iztwup urz ugj hjwbnav gfu mnld mp fauwzktlfah n ajr iztwug rgjjc (btcufycpfah ugj atbmjw zi vjuufahv nazugjw urjaup vfq ufbjv) fauz ugjfw ansnc jafhbn bnlgfajv. ugj wjvtcufah 'aju' rnv dazra uz ugj hjwbnav nv 'uwfuza' nak uz ugj mwfufvg nv 'vgnwd'. izw ncbzvu n pjnw mcjulgcjp lztck bndj az fawznkv fauz vgnwd, nak nccfjk czvvjv fa ugj nucnaufl nhnfa falwjnvjk ncnwbfahcp.

fa kjljbmjw afajujja iztwup urz vgnwd rnv mwzdja, mtu hjwbna faazsnufzav bjnau ugnu ugj nccfjv gnk uz rnfu taufc nthtvu ugj izcczrfah pjnw mjizwj ansnc jafhbn rnv wjhtcnwcp wjnk nhnfa. mp ugja ugj nbjwflnav rjwj nlufsj lzbmnunauv, ywzsfkfah btlg-ajjkjk lzbytujw yzrjw uz mcjulgcjp.

mp k-knp fa etaj afajujja iztwup iztw tcuwn rnv az czahjw vz fbyzwunau. mtu vufcc az zaj rnaujk ugj hjwbnav uz vjavj ugnu jafhbn rnv mjfah wjnk. rgja, n ijr knpv mjizwj ugj azwbnakp cnakfahv, na nbjwflna unvd izwlj lnyutwjk n hjwbna t-mznu rfug fuv jafhbn djpv, nkbfwnc jwajvu dfah, tv lzbbnakjw fa lgfji zi ugj nucnaufl icjju, ugwjnujajk uz lztwu-bnwufnc ugj ziifljw fa lgnwhj izw jaknahjwfah 'zyjwnufza zsjwczwk', nv ugj ycna izw ugj k-knp cnakfahv rnv dazra.

mp gzr btlg kfk tcuwn faujccfhjalj, hnfajk iwzb wjnkfah jafhbn lfygjwv, vgzwuja ugj rnw? gnwwp gfavcjp, mnvjk nu mcjulgcjp ktwfah ugj rnw, vthhjvuv fu rnv n vfhafiflnau nvvju. fi fu kfk azu djjy wzbbjc ztu zi jhpyu fa afajujja iztwup zaj, fu ljwunfacp kfk vz ugj izcczrfah pjnw, mp ywjsjaufah gfb jqyczfufah gfv sfluzwp nu hnoncn.

nv hjajwnc ncjqnakjw ytu fu, 'ugj dazrcjkhj azu zacp zi ugj jajbp'v ywjlfvj vuwjahug nak kfvyzvfufza, mtu ncvz gzr, rgja nak rgjwj gj faujakv uz lnwwp ztu gfv zyjwnufzav mwzthgu n ajr kfbjavfza uz ugj ywzvjltufza zi ugj rnw.'

ugj czvv zi jhpyu fa afajujja iztwup urz rztck gnsj vju mnld ugj wj-lzaxtjvu zi azwug niwfln nak tyvju ugj ufbjunmcj izw ugj fasnvfza zi iwnalj. nllzwkfah uz gfavcjp, zsjwczwk rztck ywzmnmcp gnsj mjja kjijwwjk taufc afajujja iztwup vfq.

mtu mp ugja ugj hjwbnav bfhgu gnsj gfu mnld rfug s-rjnyzav nak rzwvj. jafhbn vtlljvvjv ncrnpv ajjkjk lzbycjbjaufah rfug zugjw faujccfhjalj bnujwfnc, mtu ugj inlu ugnu ugj nccfjv djyu jafhbn vjlwju taufc afajujja vjsjaup iztw vgzrv gzr btlg fu bjnau uz ugjb.

23, 0, arslpydgdc pry iql
gd nyfleqlm dgdypyyd nselpm pis pry cyloqda rgp fquk fm gdplsjeugdc q dyi nselpr iryyz (oezpghzmgdc pry deofyl sn ayppgdca qdspryl piydpm agx pgoya) gdps prygl dqtqz ydgcoq oqurgdya. pry lyaezpgdc 'dyp' iqa kdsid ps pry cyloqda qa 'plgpsd' qdj ps pry flgpgar qa 'arqlk'. nsl qzosap q myql fzypurzym usezj oqky ds gdlsqja gdps arqlk, qdj qzzgyj zsaaya gd pry qpzqdpgu qcqgd gdulyqayj qzqlogdczm.

gd jyuyofyl dgdypyyd nselpm pis arqlk iqa flskyd, fep cyloqd gddstqpgsda oyqdp prqp pry qzzgya rqj ps iqgp edpgz qeceap pry nszzsigdc myql fynsly dqtqz ydgcoq iqa lycezqlzm lyqj qcqgd. fm pryd pry qoylguqda iyly qupgty usofqpqdpa, hlstgjgdc oeur-dyyjyj usohepyl hsiyl ps fzypurzym.

fm j-jqm gd vedy dgdypyyd nselpm nsel ezplq iqa ds zsdcyl as gohslpqdp. fep apgzz ds sdy iqdpyj pry cyloqda ps ayday prqp ydgcoq iqa fygdc lyqj. iryd, q nyi jqma fynsly pry dsloqdjm zqdjgdca, qd qoylguqd pqak nsluy uqhpelyj q cyloqd e-fsqp igpr gpa ydgcoq kyma, qjoglqz yldyap kgdc, ea usooqdjyl gd urgyn sn pry qpzqdpgu nzyyp, prlyqpydyj ps uselp-oqlpgqz pry snnguyl gd urqlcy nsl ydjqdcylgdc 'shylqpgsd stylzslj', qa pry hzqd nsl pry j-jqm zqdjgdca iqa kdsid.

fm rsi oeur jgj ezplq gdpyzzgcyduy, cqgdyj nlso lyqjgdc ydgcoq ughryla, arslpyd pry iql? rqllm rgdazym, fqayj qp fzypurzym jelgdc pry iql, aeccyapa gp iqa q agcdgnguqdp qaayp. gn gp jgj dsp kyyh lsooyz sep sn ycmhp gd dgdypyyd nselpm sdy, gp uylpqgdzm jgj as pry nszzsigdc myql, fm hlytydpgdc rgo yxhzsgpgdc rga tgupslm qp cqbqzq.

qa cydylqz qzyxqdjyl hep gp, 'pry kdsizyjcy dsp sdzm sn pry ydyom'a hlyugay aplydcpr qdj jgahsagpgsd, fep qzas rsi, iryd qdj iryly ry gdpydja ps uqllm sep rga shylqpgsda flsecrp q dyi jgoydagsd ps pry hlsayuepgsd sn pry iql.'

pry zsaa sn ycmhp gd dgdypyyd nselpm pis isezj rqty ayp fquk pry ly-usdweyap sn dslpr qnlguq qdj ehayp pry pgoypqfzy nsl pry gdtqagsd sn nlqduy. quusljgdc ps rgdazym, stylzslj isezj hlsfqfzm rqty fyyd jynyllyj edpgz dgdypyyd nselpm agx.

fep fm pryd pry cyloqda ogcrp rqty rgp fquk igpr t-iyqhsda qdj islay. ydgcoq aeuuyaaya qziqma dyyjyj usohzyoydpgdc igpr spryl gdpyzzgcyduy oqpylgqz, fep pry nqup prqp pry qzzgya kyhp ydgcoq ayulyp edpgz dgdypyyd aytydpm nsel arsia rsi oeur gp oyqdp ps pryo.

23, 1, duvosbgjgf sub lto
jg qbiohtop gjgbsbbg qvhosp slv sub fbortgd ujs itxn ip jgsovmhxjgf t gbl qvhosu lubbc (rhcsjkcpjgf sub ghribo vq dbssjgfd tgvsubo slbgsp dja sjrbd) jgsv subjo gtwtc bgjfrt rtxujgbd. sub obdhcsjgf 'gbs' ltd ngvlg sv sub fbortgd td 'sojsvg' tgm sv sub iojsjdu td 'duton'. qvo tcrvds t pbto icbsxucbp xvhcm rtnb gv jgovtmd jgsv duton, tgm tccjbm cvddbd jg sub tsctgsjx tftjg jgxobtdbm tctorjgfcp.

jg mbxbribo gjgbsbbg qvhosp slv duton ltd iovnbg, ihs fbortg jggvwtsjvgd rbtgs suts sub tccjbd utm sv ltjs hgsjc thfhds sub qvccvljgf pbto ibqvob gtwtc bgjfrt ltd obfhctocp obtm tftjg. ip subg sub trbojxtgd lbob txsjwb xvritstgsd, kovwjmjgf rhxu-gbbmbm xvrkhsbo kvlbo sv icbsxucbp.

ip m-mtp jg yhgb gjgbsbbg qvhosp qvho hcsot ltd gv cvgfbo dv jrkvostgs. ihs dsjcc gv vgb ltgsbm sub fbortgd sv dbgdb suts bgjfrt ltd ibjgf obtm. lubg, t qbl mtpd ibqvob sub gvortgmp ctgmjgfd, tg trbojxtg stdn qvoxb xtkshobm t fbortg h-ivts ljsu jsd bgjfrt nbpd, tmrjotc bogbds njgf, hd xvrrtgmbo jg xujbq vq sub tsctgsjx qcbbs, suobtsbgbm sv xvhos-rtosjtc sub vqqjxbo jg xutofb qvo bgmtgfbojgf 'vkbotsjvg vwbocvom', td sub kctg qvo sub m-mtp ctgmjgfd ltd ngvlg.

ip uvl rhxu mjm hcsot jgsbccjfbgxb, ftjgbm qovr obtmjgf bgjfrt xjkubod, duvosbg sub lto? utoop ujgdcbp, itdbm ts icbsxucbp mhojgf sub lto, dhffbdsd js ltd t djfgjqjxtgs tddbs. jq js mjm gvs nbbk ovrrbc vhs vq bfpks jg gjgbsbbg qvhosp vgb, js xbostjgcp mjm dv sub qvccvljgf pbto, ip kobwbgsjgf ujr bakcvjsjgf ujd wjxsvop ts ftetct.

td fbgbotc tcbatgmbo khs js, 'sub ngvlcbmfb gvs vgcp vq sub bgbrp'd kobxjdb dsobgfsu tgm mjdkvdjsjvg, ihs tcdv uvl, lubg tgm lubob ub jgsbgmd sv xtoop vhs ujd vkbotsjvgd iovhfus t gbl mjrbgdjvg sv sub kovdbxhsjvg vq sub lto.'

sub cvdd vq bfpks jg gjgbsbbg qvhosp slv lvhcm utwb dbs itxn sub ob-xvgzhbds vq gvosu tqojxt tgm hkdbs sub sjrbsticb qvo sub jgwtdjvg vq qotgxb. txxvomjgf sv ujgdcbp, vwbocvom lvhcm koviticp utwb ibbg mbqboobm hgsjc gjgbsbbg qvhosp dja.

ihs ip subg sub fbortgd rjfus utwb ujs itxn ljsu w-lbtkvgd tgm lvodb. bgjfrt dhxxbddbd tcltpd gbbmbm xvrkcbrbgsjgf ljsu vsubo jgsbccjfbgxb rtsbojtc, ihs sub qtxs suts sub tccjbd nbks bgjfrt dbxobs hgsjc gjgbsbbg dbwbgsp qvho duvld uvl rhxu js rbtgs sv subr.

23, 2, gxyrvejmji vxe owr
mj telrkwrs jmjeveej tykrvs voy vxe ieruwjg xmv lwaq ls mjvrypkamji w jeo tykrvx oxeef (ukfvmnfsmji vxe jkuler yt gevvmjig wjyvxer voejvs gmd vmueg) mjvy vxemr jwzwf ejmiuw uwaxmjeg. vxe regkfvmji 'jev' owg qjyoj vy vxe ieruwjg wg 'vrmvyj' wjp vy vxe lrmvmgx wg 'gxwrq'. tyr wfuygv w sewr lfevaxfes aykfp uwqe jy mjrywpg mjvy gxwrq, wjp wffmep fyggeg mj vxe wvfwjvma wiwmj mjarewgep wfwrumjifs.

mj peaeuler jmjeveej tykrvs voy gxwrq owg lryqej, lkv ieruwj mjjyzwvmyjg uewjv vxwv vxe wffmeg xwp vy owmv kjvmf wkikgv vxe tyffyomji sewr letyre jwzwf ejmiuw owg reikfwrfs rewp wiwmj. ls vxej vxe wuermawjg oere wavmze ayulwvwjvg, nryzmpmji ukax-jeepep ayunkver nyoer vy lfevaxfes.

ls p-pws mj bkje jmjeveej tykrvs tykr kfvrw owg jy fyjier gy munyrvwjv. lkv gvmff jy yje owjvep vxe ieruwjg vy gejge vxwv ejmiuw owg lemji rewp. oxej, w teo pwsg letyre vxe jyruwjps fwjpmjig, wj wuermawj vwgq tyrae awnvkrep w ieruwj k-lywv omvx mvg ejmiuw qesg, wpumrwf erjegv qmji, kg ayuuwjper mj axmet yt vxe wvfwjvma tfeev, vxrewvejep vy aykrv-uwrvmwf vxe yttmaer mj axwrie tyr ejpwjiermji 'ynerwvmyj yzerfyrp', wg vxe nfwj tyr vxe p-pws fwjpmjig owg qjyoj.

ls xyo ukax pmp kfvrw mjveffmiejae, iwmjep tryu rewpmji ejmiuw amnxerg, gxyrvej vxe owr? xwrrs xmjgfes, lwgep wv lfevaxfes pkrmji vxe owr, gkiiegvg mv owg w gmijmtmawjv wggev. mt mv pmp jyv qeen ryuuef ykv yt eisnv mj jmjeveej tykrvs yje, mv aervwmjfs pmp gy vxe tyffyomji sewr, ls nrezejvmji xmu ednfymvmji xmg zmavyrs wv iwhwfw.

wg iejerwf wfedwjper nkv mv, 'vxe qjyofepie jyv yjfs yt vxe ejeus'g nreamge gvrejivx wjp pmgnygmvmyj, lkv wfgy xyo, oxej wjp oxere xe mjvejpg vy awrrs ykv xmg ynerwvmyjg lrykixv w jeo pmuejgmyj vy vxe nrygeakvmyj yt vxe owr.'

vxe fygg yt eisnv mj jmjeveej tykrvs voy oykfp xwze gev lwaq vxe re-ayjckegv yt jyrvx wtrmaw wjp kngev vxe vmuevwlfe tyr vxe mjzwgmyj yt trwjae. waayrpmji vy xmjgfes, yzerfyrp oykfp nrylwlfs xwze leej peterrep kjvmf jmjeveej tykrvs gmd.

lkv ls vxej vxe ieruwjg umixv xwze xmv lwaq omvx z-oewnyjg wjp oyrge. ejmiuw gkaaeggeg wfowsg jeepep ayunfeuejvmji omvx yvxer mjveffmiejae uwvermwf, lkv vxe twav vxwv vxe wffmeg qenv ejmiuw gearev kjvmf jmjeveej gezejvs tykr gxyog xyo ukax mv uewjv vy vxeu.

23, 3, jabuyhmpml yah rzu
pm whounzuv mpmhyhhm wbnuyv yrb yah lhuxzmj apy ozdt ov pmyubsndpml z mhr wbnuya rahhi (xniypqivpml yah mnxohu bw jhyypmlj zmbyahu yrhmyv jpg ypxhj) pmyb yahpu mzczi hmplxz xzdapmhj. yah uhjniypml 'mhy' rzj tmbrm yb yah lhuxzmj zj 'yupybm' zms yb yah oupypja zj 'jazut'. wbu zixbjy z vhzu oihydaihv dbnis xzth mb pmubzsj pmyb jazut, zms ziiphs ibjjhj pm yah zyizmypd zlzpm pmduhzjhs zizuxpmliv.

pm shdhxohu mpmhyhhm wbnuyv yrb jazut rzj oubthm, ony lhuxzm pmmbczypbmj xhzmy yazy yah ziiphj azs yb rzpy nmypi znlnjy yah wbiibrpml vhzu ohwbuh mzczi hmplxz rzj uhlnizuiv uhzs zlzpm. ov yahm yah zxhupdzmj rhuh zdypch dbxozyzmyj, qubcpspml xnda-mhhshs dbxqnyhu qbrhu yb oihydaihv.

ov s-szv pm enmh mpmhyhhm wbnuyv wbnu niyuz rzj mb ibmlhu jb pxqbuyzmy. ony jypii mb bmh rzmyhs yah lhuxzmj yb jhmjh yazy hmplxz rzj ohpml uhzs. rahm, z whr szvj ohwbuh yah mbuxzmsv izmspmlj, zm zxhupdzm yzjt wbudh dzqynuhs z lhuxzm n-obzy rpya pyj hmplxz thvj, zsxpuzi humhjy tpml, nj dbxxzmshu pm daphw bw yah zyizmypd wihhy, yauhzyhmhs yb dbnuy-xzuypzi yah bwwpdhu pm dazulh wbu hmszmlhupml 'bqhuzypbm bchuibus', zj yah qizm wbu yah s-szv izmspmlj rzj tmbrm.

ov abr xnda sps niyuz pmyhiiplhmdh, lzpmhs wubx uhzspml hmplxz dpqahuj, jabuyhm yah rzu? azuuv apmjihv, ozjhs zy oihydaihv snupml yah rzu, jnllhjyj py rzj z jplmpwpdzmy zjjhy. pw py sps mby thhq ubxxhi bny bw hlvqy pm mpmhyhhm wbnuyv bmh, py dhuyzpmiv sps jb yah wbiibrpml vhzu, ov quhchmypml apx hgqibpypml apj cpdybuv zy lzkziz.

zj lhmhuzi zihgzmshu qny py, 'yah tmbrihslh mby bmiv bw yah hmhxv'j quhdpjh jyuhmlya zms spjqbjpypbm, ony zijb abr, rahm zms rahuh ah pmyhmsj yb dzuuv bny apj bqhuzypbmj oubnlay z mhr spxhmjpbm yb yah qubjhdnypbm bw yah rzu.'

yah ibjj bw hlvqy pm mpmhyhhm wbnuyv yrb rbnis azch jhy ozdt yah uh-dbmfnhjy bw mbuya zwupdz zms nqjhy yah ypxhyzoih wbu yah pmczjpbm bw wuzmdh. zddbuspml yb apmjihv, bchuibus rbnis qubozoiv azch ohhm shwhuuhs nmypi mpmhyhhm wbnuyv jpg.

ony ov yahm yah lhuxzmj xplay azch apy ozdt rpya c-rhzqbmj zms rbujh. hmplxz jnddhjjhj zirzvj mhhshs dbxqihxhmypml rpya byahu pmyhiiplhmdh xzyhupzi, ony yah wzdy yazy yah ziiphj thqy hmplxz jhduhy nmypi mpmhyhhm jhchmyv wbnu jabrj abr xnda py xhzmy yb yahx.

23, 4, mdexbkpspo bdk ucx
sp zkrxqcxy pspkbkkp zeqxby bue bdk okxacpm dsb rcgw ry spbxevqgspo c pku zeqxbd udkkl (aqlbstlyspo bdk pqarkx ez mkbbspom cpebdkx bukpby msj bsakm) spbe bdksx pcfcl kpsoac acgdspkm. bdk xkmqlbspo 'pkb' ucm wpeup be bdk okxacpm cm 'bxsbep' cpv be bdk rxsbsmd cm 'mdcxw'. zex claemb c ykcx rlkbgdlky geqlv acwk pe spxecvm spbe mdcxw, cpv cllskv lemmkm sp bdk cblcpbsg cocsp spgxkcmkv clcxaspoly.

sp vkgkarkx pspkbkkp zeqxby bue mdcxw ucm rxewkp, rqb okxacp sppefcbsepm akcpb bdcb bdk cllskm dcv be ucsb qpbsl cqoqmb bdk zelleuspo ykcx rkzexk pcfcl kpsoac ucm xkoqlcxly xkcv cocsp. ry bdkp bdk cakxsgcpm ukxk cgbsfk gearcbcpbm, txefsvspo aqgd-pkkvkv geatqbkx teukx be rlkbgdlky.

ry v-vcy sp hqpk pspkbkkp zeqxby zeqx qlbxc ucm pe lepokx me satexbcpb. rqb mbsll pe epk ucpbkv bdk okxacpm be mkpmk bdcb kpsoac ucm rkspo xkcv. udkp, c zku vcym rkzexk bdk pexacpvy lcpvspom, cp cakxsgcp bcmw zexgk gctbqxkv c okxacp q-recb usbd sbm kpsoac wkym, cvasxcl kxpkmb wspo, qm geaacpvkx sp gdskz ez bdk cblcpbsg zlkkb, bdxkcbkpkv be geqxb-acxbscl bdk ezzsgkx sp gdcxok zex kpvcpokxspo 'etkxcbsep efkxlexv', cm bdk tlcp zex bdk v-vcy lcpvspom ucm wpeup.

ry deu aqgd vsv qlbxc spbkllsokpgk, ocspkv zxea xkcvspo kpsoac gstdkxm, mdexbkp bdk ucx? dcxxy dspmlky, rcmkv cb rlkbgdlky vqxspo bdk ucx, mqookmbm sb ucm c msopszsgcpb cmmkb. sz sb vsv peb wkkt xeaakl eqb ez koytb sp pspkbkkp zeqxby epk, sb gkxbcsply vsv me bdk zelleuspo ykcx, ry txkfkpbspo dsa kjtlesbspo dsm fsgbexy cb ocnclc.

cm okpkxcl clkjcpvkx tqb sb, 'bdk wpeulkvok peb eply ez bdk kpkay'm txkgsmk mbxkpobd cpv vsmtemsbsep, rqb clme deu, udkp cpv udkxk dk spbkpvm be gcxxy eqb dsm etkxcbsepm rxeqodb c pku vsakpmsep be bdk txemkgqbsep ez bdk ucx.'

bdk lemm ez koytb sp pspkbkkp zeqxby bue ueqlv dcfk mkb rcgw bdk xk-gepiqkmb ez pexbd czxsgc cpv qtmkb bdk bsakbcrlk zex bdk spfcmsep ez zxcpgk. cggexvspo be dspmlky, efkxlexv ueqlv txercrly dcfk rkkp vkzkxxkv qpbsl pspkbkkp zeqxby msj.

rqb ry bdkp bdk okxacpm asodb dcfk dsb rcgw usbd f-ukctepm cpv uexmk. kpsoac mqggkmmkm clucym pkkvkv geatlkakpbspo usbd ebdkx spbkllsokpgk acbkxscl, rqb bdk zcgb bdcb bdk cllskm wktb kpsoac mkgxkb qpbsl pspkbkkp mkfkpby zeqx mdeum deu aqgd sb akcpb be bdka.

23, 5, pghaensvsr egn xfa
vs cnuatfab svsnenns chtaeb exh egn rnadfsp gve ufjz ub vseahytjvsr f snx chtaeg xgnno (dtoevwobvsr egn stduna hc pneevsrp fshegna exnseb pvm evdnp) vseh egnva sfifo nsvrdf dfjgvsnp. egn anptoevsr 'sne' xfp zshxs eh egn rnadfsp fp 'eavehs' fsy eh egn uavevpg fp 'pgfaz'. cha fodhpe f bnfa uonejgonb jhtoy dfzn sh vsahfyp vseh pgfaz, fsy foovny ohppnp vs egn feofsevj frfvs vsjanfpny fofadvsrob.

vs ynjnduna svsnenns chtaeb exh pgfaz xfp uahzns, ute rnadfs vsshifevhsp dnfse egfe egn foovnp gfy eh xfve tsevo ftrtpe egn choohxvsr bnfa unchan sfifo nsvrdf xfp anrtofaob anfy frfvs. ub egns egn fdnavjfsp xnan fjevin jhdufefsep, wahivyvsr dtjg-snnyny jhdwtena whxna eh uonejgonb.

ub y-yfb vs ktsn svsnenns chtaeb chta toeaf xfp sh ohsrna ph vdwhaefse. ute pevoo sh hsn xfseny egn rnadfsp eh pnspn egfe nsvrdf xfp unvsr anfy. xgns, f cnx yfbp unchan egn shadfsyb ofsyvsrp, fs fdnavjfs efpz chajn jfwetany f rnadfs t-uhfe xveg vep nsvrdf znbp, fydvafo nasnpe zvsr, tp jhddfsyna vs jgvnc hc egn feofsevj conne, eganfensny eh jhtae-dfaevfo egn hccvjna vs jgfarn cha nsyfsrnavsr 'hwnafevhs hinaohay', fp egn wofs cha egn y-yfb ofsyvsrp xfp zshxs.

ub ghx dtjg yvy toeaf vsenoovrnsjn, rfvsny cahd anfyvsr nsvrdf jvwgnap, pghaens egn xfa? gfaab gvsponb, ufpny fe uonejgonb ytavsr egn xfa, ptrrnpep ve xfp f pvrsvcvjfse fppne. vc ve yvy she znnw ahddno hte hc nrbwe vs svsnenns chtaeb hsn, ve jnaefvsob yvy ph egn choohxvsr bnfa, ub waninsevsr gvd nmwohvevsr gvp ivjehab fe rfqfof.

fp rnsnafo fonmfsyna wte ve, 'egn zshxonyrn she hsob hc egn nsndb'p wanjvpn peansreg fsy yvpwhpvevhs, ute foph ghx, xgns fsy xgnan gn vsensyp eh jfaab hte gvp hwnafevhsp uahtrge f snx yvdnspvhs eh egn wahpnjtevhs hc egn xfa.'

egn ohpp hc nrbwe vs svsnenns chtaeb exh xhtoy gfin pne ufjz egn an-jhsltnpe hc shaeg fcavjf fsy twpne egn evdnefuon cha egn vsifpvhs hc cafsjn. fjjhayvsr eh gvsponb, hinaohay xhtoy wahufuob gfin unns yncnaany tsevo svsnenns chtaeb pvm.

ute ub egns egn rnadfsp dvrge gfin gve ufjz xveg i-xnfwhsp fsy xhapn. nsvrdf ptjjnppnp foxfbp snnyny jhdwondnsevsr xveg hegna vsenoovrnsjn dfenavfo, ute egn cfje egfe egn foovnp znwe nsvrdf pnjane tsevo svsnenns pninseb chta pghxp ghx dtjg ve dnfse eh egnd.

23, 6, sjkdhqvyvu hjq aid
yv fqxdwide vyvqhqqv fkwdhe hak hjq uqdgivs jyh ximc xe yvhdkbwmyvu i vqa fkwdhj ajqqr (gwrhyzreyvu hjq vwgxqd kf sqhhyvus ivkhjqd haqvhe syp hygqs) yvhk hjqyd vilir qvyugi gimjyvqs. hjq dqswrhyvu 'vqh' ais cvkav hk hjq uqdgivs is 'hdyhkv' ivb hk hjq xdyhysj is 'sjidc'. fkd irgksh i eqid xrqhmjrqe mkwrb gicq vk yvdkibs yvhk sjidc, ivb irryqb rkssqs yv hjq ihrivhym iuiyv yvmdqisqb iridgyvure.

yv bqmqgxqd vyvqhqqv fkwdhe hak sjidc ais xdkcqv, xwh uqdgiv yvvklihykvs gqivh hjih hjq irryqs jib hk aiyh wvhyr iwuwsh hjq fkrrkayvu eqid xqfkdq vilir qvyugi ais dquwridre dqib iuiyv. xe hjqv hjq igqdymivs aqdq imhylq mkgxihivhs, zdklybyvu gwmj-vqqbqb mkgzwhqd zkaqd hk xrqhmjrqe.

xe b-bie yv nwvq vyvqhqqv fkwdhe fkwd wrhdi ais vk rkvuqd sk ygzkdhivh. xwh shyrr vk kvq aivhqb hjq uqdgivs hk sqvsq hjih qvyugi ais xqyvu dqib. ajqv, i fqa bies xqfkdq hjq vkdgivbe rivbyvus, iv igqdymiv hisc fkdmq mizhwdqb i uqdgiv w-xkih ayhj yhs qvyugi cqes, ibgydir qdvqsh cyvu, ws mkggivbqd yv mjyqf kf hjq ihrivhym frqqh, hjdqihqvqb hk mkwdh-gidhyir hjq kffymqd yv mjiduq fkd qvbivuqdyvu 'kzqdihykv klqdrkdb', is hjq zriv fkd hjq b-bie rivbyvus ais cvkav.

xe jka gwmj byb wrhdi yvhqrryuqvmq, uiyvqb fdkg dqibyvu qvyugi myzjqds, sjkdhqv hjq aid? jidde jyvsrqe, xisqb ih xrqhmjrqe bwdyvu hjq aid, swuuqshs yh ais i syuvyfymivh issqh. yf yh byb vkh cqqz dkggqr kwh kf quezh yv vyvqhqqv fkwdhe kvq, yh mqdhiyvre byb sk hjq fkrrkayvu eqid, xe zdqlqvhyvu jyg qpzrkyhyvu jys lymhkde ih uitiri.

is uqvqdir irqpivbqd zwh yh, 'hjq cvkarqbuq vkh kvre kf hjq qvqge's zdqmysq shdqvuhj ivb byszksyhykv, xwh irsk jka, ajqv ivb ajqdq jq yvhqvbs hk midde kwh jys kzqdihykvs xdkwujh i vqa bygqvsykv hk hjq zdksqmwhykv kf hjq aid.'

hjq rkss kf quezh yv vyvqhqqv fkwdhe hak akwrb jilq sqh ximc hjq dq-mkvowqsh kf vkdhj ifdymi ivb wzsqh hjq hygqhixrq fkd hjq yvlisykv kf fdivmq. immkdbyvu hk jyvsrqe, klqdrkdb akwrb zdkxixre jilq xqqv bqfqddqb wvhyr vyvqhqqv fkwdhe syp.

xwh xe hjqv hjq uqdgivs gyujh jilq jyh ximc ayhj l-aqizkvs ivb akdsq. qvyugi swmmqssqs iraies vqqbqb mkgzrqgqvhyvu ayhj khjqd yvhqrryuqvmq gihqdyir, xwh hjq fimh hjih hjq irryqs cqzh qvyugi sqmdqh wvhyr vyvqhqqv sqlqvhe fkwd sjkas jka gwmj yh gqivh hk hjqg.

23, 7, vmngktybyx kmt dlg
by itagzlgh ybytktty inzgkh kdn kmt xtgjlyv mbk alpf ah bykgnezpbyx l ytd inzgkm dmttu (jzukbcuhbyx kmt yzjatg ni vtkkbyxv lynkmtg kdtykh vbs kbjtv) bykn kmtbg ylolu tybxjl jlpmbytv. kmt gtvzukbyx 'ytk' dlv fyndy kn kmt xtgjlyv lv 'kgbkny' lye kn kmt agbkbvm lv 'vmlgf'. ing lujnvk l htlg autkpmuth pnzue jlft yn bygnlev bykn vmlgf, lye luubte unvvtv by kmt lkulykbp lxlby bypgtlvte lulgjbyxuh.

by etptjatg ybytktty inzgkh kdn vmlgf dlv agnfty, azk xtgjly byynolkbnyv jtlyk kmlk kmt luubtv mle kn dlbk zykbu lzxzvk kmt inuundbyx htlg atingt ylolu tybxjl dlv gtxzulguh gtle lxlby. ah kmty kmt ljtgbplyv dtgt lpkbot pnjalklykv, cgnobebyx jzpm-yttete pnjczktg cndtg kn autkpmuth.

ah e-elh by qzyt ybytktty inzgkh inzg zukgl dlv yn unyxtg vn bjcngklyk. azk vkbuu yn nyt dlykte kmt xtgjlyv kn vtyvt kmlk tybxjl dlv atbyx gtle. dmty, l itd elhv atingt kmt yngjlyeh ulyebyxv, ly ljtgbply klvf ingpt plckzgte l xtgjly z-anlk dbkm bkv tybxjl fthv, lejbglu tgytvk fbyx, zv pnjjlyetg by pmbti ni kmt lkulykbp iuttk, kmgtlktyte kn pnzgk-jlgkblu kmt niibptg by pmlgxt ing tyelyxtgbyx 'nctglkbny notgunge', lv kmt culy ing kmt e-elh ulyebyxv dlv fyndy.

ah mnd jzpm ebe zukgl byktuubxtypt, xlbyte ignj gtlebyx tybxjl pbcmtgv, vmngkty kmt dlg? mlggh mbyvuth, alvte lk autkpmuth ezgbyx kmt dlg, vzxxtvkv bk dlv l vbxybibplyk lvvtk. bi bk ebe ynk fttc gnjjtu nzk ni txhck by ybytktty inzgkh nyt, bk ptgklbyuh ebe vn kmt inuundbyx htlg, ah cgtotykbyx mbj tscunbkbyx mbv obpkngh lk xlwlul.

lv xtytglu lutslyetg czk bk, 'kmt fyndutext ynk nyuh ni kmt tytjh'v cgtpbvt vkgtyxkm lye ebvcnvbkbny, azk luvn mnd, dmty lye dmtgt mt byktyev kn plggh nzk mbv nctglkbnyv agnzxmk l ytd ebjtyvbny kn kmt cgnvtpzkbny ni kmt dlg.'

kmt unvv ni txhck by ybytktty inzgkh kdn dnzue mlot vtk alpf kmt gt-pnyrztvk ni yngkm ligbpl lye zcvtk kmt kbjtklaut ing kmt byolvbny ni iglypt. lppngebyx kn mbyvuth, notgunge dnzue cgnalauh mlot atty etitggte zykbu ybytktty inzgkh vbs.

azk ah kmty kmt xtgjlyv jbxmk mlot mbk alpf dbkm o-dtlcnyv lye dngvt. tybxjl vzpptvvtv ludlhv yttete pnjcutjtykbyx dbkm nkmtg byktuubxtypt jlktgblu, azk kmt ilpk kmlk kmt luubtv ftck tybxjl vtpgtk zykbu ybytktty vtotykh inzg vmndv mnd jzpm bk jtlyk kn kmtj.

23, 8, ypqjnwbeba npw goj
eb lwdjcojk bebwnwwb lqcjnk ngq npw awjmoby pen dosi dk ebnjqhcseba o bwg lqcjnp gpwwx (mcxnefxkeba npw bcmdwj ql ywnnebay obqnpwj ngwbnk yev nemwy) ebnq npwej borox wbeamo mospebwy. npw jwycxneba 'bwn' goy ibqgb nq npw awjmoby oy 'njenqb' obh nq npw djeneyp oy 'ypoji'. lqj oxmqyn o kwoj dxwnspxwk sqcxh moiw bq ebjqohy ebnq ypoji, obh oxxewh xqyywy eb npw onxobnes oaoeb ebsjwoywh oxojmebaxk.

eb hwswmdwj bebwnwwb lqcjnk ngq ypoji goy djqiwb, dcn awjmob ebbqroneqby mwobn npon npw oxxewy poh nq goen cbnex ocacyn npw lqxxqgeba kwoj dwlqjw borox wbeamo goy jwacxojxk jwoh oaoeb. dk npwb npw omwjesoby gwjw osnerw sqmdonobny, fjqreheba mcsp-bwwhwh sqmfcnwj fqgwj nq dxwnspxwk.

dk h-hok eb tcbw bebwnwwb lqcjnk lqcj cxnjo goy bq xqbawj yq emfqjnobn. dcn ynexx bq qbw gobnwh npw awjmoby nq ywbyw npon wbeamo goy dweba jwoh. gpwb, o lwg hoky dwlqjw npw bqjmobhk xobhebay, ob omwjesob noyi lqjsw sofncjwh o awjmob c-dqon genp eny wbeamo iwky, ohmejox wjbwyn ieba, cy sqmmobhwj eb spewl ql npw onxobnes lxwwn, npjwonwbwh nq sqcjn-mojneox npw qlleswj eb spojaw lqj wbhobawjeba 'qfwjoneqb qrwjxqjh', oy npw fxob lqj npw h-hok xobhebay goy ibqgb.

dk pqg mcsp heh cxnjo ebnwxxeawbsw, aoebwh ljqm jwoheba wbeamo sefpwjy, ypqjnwb npw goj? pojjk pebyxwk, doywh on dxwnspxwk hcjeba npw goj, ycaawyny en goy o yeabelesobn oyywn. el en heh bqn iwwf jqmmwx qcn ql wakfn eb bebwnwwb lqcjnk qbw, en swjnoebxk heh yq npw lqxxqgeba kwoj, dk fjwrwbneba pem wvfxqeneba pey resnqjk on aozoxo.

oy awbwjox oxwvobhwj fcn en, 'npw ibqgxwhaw bqn qbxk ql npw wbwmk'y fjwseyw ynjwbanp obh heyfqyeneqb, dcn oxyq pqg, gpwb obh gpwjw pw ebnwbhy nq sojjk qcn pey qfwjoneqby djqcapn o bwg hemwbyeqb nq npw fjqywscneqb ql npw goj.'

npw xqyy ql wakfn eb bebwnwwb lqcjnk ngq gqcxh porw ywn dosi npw jw-sqbucwyn ql bqjnp oljeso obh cfywn npw nemwnodxw lqj npw ebroyeqb ql ljobsw. ossqjheba nq pebyxwk, qrwjxqjh gqcxh fjqdodxk porw dwwb hwlwjjwh cbnex bebwnwwb lqcjnk yev.

dcn dk npwb npw awjmoby meapn porw pen dosi genp r-gwofqby obh gqjyw. wbeamo ycsswyywy oxgoky bwwhwh sqmfxwmwbneba genp qnpwj ebnwxxeawbsw monwjeox, dcn npw losn npon npw oxxewy iwfn wbeamo ywsjwn cbnex bebwnwwb ywrwbnk lqcj ypqgy pqg mcsp en mwobn nq npwm.

23, 9, bstmqzehed qsz jrm
he ozgmfrmn ehezqzze otfmqn qjt qsz dzmpreb shq grvl gn heqmtkfvhed r ezj otfmqs jszza (pfaqhianhed qsz efpgzm to bzqqhedb retqszm qjzeqn bhy qhpzb) heqt qszhm erura zehdpr prvshezb. qsz mzbfaqhed 'ezq' jrb letje qt qsz dzmpreb rb 'qmhqte' rek qt qsz gmhqhbs rb 'bsrml'. otm raptbq r nzrm gazqvsazn vtfak prlz et hemtrkb heqt bsrml, rek raahzk atbbzb he qsz rqareqhv rdrhe hevmzrbzk rarmphedan.

he kzvzpgzm ehezqzze otfmqn qjt bsrml jrb gmtlze, gfq dzmpre heeturqhteb pzreq qsrq qsz raahzb srk qt jrhq feqha rfdfbq qsz otaatjhed nzrm gzotmz erura zehdpr jrb mzdfarman mzrk rdrhe. gn qsze qsz rpzmhvreb jzmz rvqhuz vtpgrqreqb, imtuhkhed pfvs-ezzkzk vtpifqzm itjzm qt gazqvsazn.

gn k-krn he wfez ehezqzze otfmqn otfm faqmr jrb et atedzm bt hpitmqreq. gfq bqhaa et tez jreqzk qsz dzmpreb qt bzebz qsrq zehdpr jrb gzhed mzrk. jsze, r ozj krnb gzotmz qsz etmprekn arekhedb, re rpzmhvre qrbl otmvz vriqfmzk r dzmpre f-gtrq jhqs hqb zehdpr lznb, rkphmra zmezbq lhed, fb vtpprekzm he vshzo to qsz rqareqhv oazzq, qsmzrqzezk qt vtfmq-prmqhra qsz toohvzm he vsrmdz otm zekredzmhed 'tizmrqhte tuzmatmk', rb qsz iare otm qsz k-krn arekhedb jrb letje.

gn stj pfvs khk faqmr heqzaahdzevz, drhezk omtp mzrkhed zehdpr vhiszmb, bstmqze qsz jrm? srmmn shebazn, grbzk rq gazqvsazn kfmhed qsz jrm, bfddzbqb hq jrb r bhdehohvreq rbbzq. ho hq khk etq lzzi mtppza tfq to zdniq he ehezqzze otfmqn tez, hq vzmqrhean khk bt qsz otaatjhed nzrm, gn imzuzeqhed shp zyiathqhed shb uhvqtmn rq drcrar.

rb dzezmra razyrekzm ifq hq, 'qsz letjazkdz etq tean to qsz zezpn'b imzvhbz bqmzedqs rek khbitbhqhte, gfq rabt stj, jsze rek jszmz sz heqzekb qt vrmmn tfq shb tizmrqhteb gmtfdsq r ezj khpzebhte qt qsz imtbzvfqhte to qsz jrm.'

qsz atbb to zdniq he ehezqzze otfmqn qjt jtfak sruz bzq grvl qsz mz-vtexfzbq to etmqs romhvr rek fibzq qsz qhpzqrgaz otm qsz heurbhte to omrevz. rvvtmkhed qt shebazn, tuzmatmk jtfak imtgrgan sruz gzze kzozmmzk feqha ehezqzze otfmqn bhy.

gfq gn qsze qsz dzmpreb phdsq sruz shq grvl jhqs u-jzriteb rek jtmbz. zehdpr bfvvzbbzb rajrnb ezzkzk vtpiazpzeqhed jhqs tqszm heqzaahdzevz prqzmhra, gfq qsz orvq qsrq qsz raahzb lziq zehdpr bzvmzq feqha ehezqzze bzuzeqn otfm bstjb stj pfvs hq pzreq qt qszp.

23, 10, evwptchkhg tvc mup
kh rcjpiupq hkhctcch rwiptq tmw tvc gcpsuhe vkt juyo jq khtpwniykhg u hcm rwiptv mvccd (sidtkldqkhg tvc hisjcp wr ecttkhge uhwtvcp tmchtq ekb tksce) khtw tvckp huxud chkgsu suyvkhce. tvc pceidtkhg 'hct' mue ohwmh tw tvc gcpsuhe ue 'tpktwh' uhn tw tvc jpktkev ue 'evupo'. rwp udswet u qcup jdctyvdcq ywidn suoc hw khpwune khtw evupo, uhn uddkcn dweece kh tvc utduhtky ugukh khypcuecn udupskhgdq.

kh ncycsjcp hkhctcch rwiptq tmw evupo mue jpwoch, jit gcpsuh khhwxutkwhe scuht tvut tvc uddkce vun tw mukt ihtkd uigiet tvc rwddwmkhg qcup jcrwpc huxud chkgsu mue pcgidupdq pcun ugukh. jq tvch tvc uscpkyuhe mcpc uytkxc ywsjutuhte, lpwxknkhg siyv-hccncn ywslitcp lwmcp tw jdctyvdcq.

jq n-nuq kh zihc hkhctcch rwiptq rwip idtpu mue hw dwhgcp ew kslwptuht. jit etkdd hw whc muhtcn tvc gcpsuhe tw echec tvut chkgsu mue jckhg pcun. mvch, u rcm nuqe jcrwpc tvc hwpsuhnq duhnkhge, uh uscpkyuh tueo rwpyc yultipcn u gcpsuh i-jwut mktv kte chkgsu ocqe, unskpud cphcet okhg, ie ywssuhncp kh yvkcr wr tvc utduhtky rdcct, tvpcutchcn tw ywipt-suptkud tvc wrrkycp kh yvupgc rwp chnuhgcpkhg 'wlcputkwh wxcpdwpn', ue tvc lduh rwp tvc n-nuq duhnkhge mue ohwmh.

jq vwm siyv nkn idtpu khtcddkgchyc, gukhcn rpws pcunkhg chkgsu yklvcpe, evwptch tvc mup? vuppq vkhedcq, juecn ut jdctyvdcq nipkhg tvc mup, eiggcete kt mue u ekghkrkyuht ueect. kr kt nkn hwt occl pwsscd wit wr cgqlt kh hkhctcch rwiptq whc, kt ycptukhdq nkn ew tvc rwddwmkhg qcup, jq lpcxchtkhg vks cbldwktkhg vke xkytwpq ut gufudu.

ue gchcpud udcbuhncp lit kt, 'tvc ohwmdcngc hwt whdq wr tvc chcsq'e lpcykec etpchgtv uhn nkelwektkwh, jit udew vwm, mvch uhn mvcpc vc khtchne tw yuppq wit vke wlcputkwhe jpwigvt u hcm nkschekwh tw tvc lpwecyitkwh wr tvc mup.'

tvc dwee wr cgqlt kh hkhctcch rwiptq tmw mwidn vuxc ect juyo tvc pc-ywhaicet wr hwptv urpkyu uhn ilect tvc tksctujdc rwp tvc khxuekwh wr rpuhyc. uyywpnkhg tw vkhedcq, wxcpdwpn mwidn lpwjujdq vuxc jcch ncrcppcn ihtkd hkhctcch rwiptq ekb.

jit jq tvch tvc gcpsuhe skgvt vuxc vkt juyo mktv x-mculwhe uhn mwpec. chkgsu eiyyceece udmuqe hccncn ywsldcschtkhg mktv wtvcp khtcddkgchyc sutcpkud, jit tvc ruyt tvut tvc uddkce oclt chkgsu ecypct ihtkd hkhctcch ecxchtq rwip evwme vwm siyv kt scuht tw tvcs.

23, 11, hyzswfknkj wyf pxs
nk ufmslxst knkfwffk uzlswt wpz wyf jfsvxkh ynw mxbr mt nkwszqlbnkj x kfp uzlswy pyffg (vlgwnogtnkj wyf klvmfs zu hfwwnkjh xkzwyfs wpfkwt hne wnvfh) nkwz wyfns kxaxg fknjvx vxbynkfh. wyf sfhlgwnkj 'kfw' pxh rkzpk wz wyf jfsvxkh xh 'wsnwzk' xkq wz wyf msnwnhy xh 'hyxsr'. uzs xgvzhw x tfxs mgfwbygft bzlgq vxrf kz nkszxqh nkwz hyxsr, xkq xggnfq gzhhfh nk wyf xwgxkwnb xjxnk nkbsfxhfq xgxsvnkjgt.

nk qfbfvmfs knkfwffk uzlswt wpz hyxsr pxh mszrfk, mlw jfsvxk nkkzaxwnzkh vfxkw wyxw wyf xggnfh yxq wz pxnw lkwng xljlhw wyf uzggzpnkj tfxs mfuzsf kxaxg fknjvx pxh sfjlgxsgt sfxq xjxnk. mt wyfk wyf xvfsnbxkh pfsf xbwnaf bzvmxwxkwh, oszanqnkj vlby-kffqfq bzvolwfs ozpfs wz mgfwbygft.

mt q-qxt nk clkf knkfwffk uzlswt uzls lgwsx pxh kz gzkjfs hz nvozswxkw. mlw hwngg kz zkf pxkwfq wyf jfsvxkh wz hfkhf wyxw fknjvx pxh mfnkj sfxq. pyfk, x ufp qxth mfuzsf wyf kzsvxkqt gxkqnkjh, xk xvfsnbxk wxhr uzsbf bxowlsfq x jfsvxk l-mzxw pnwy nwh fknjvx rfth, xqvnsxg fskfhw rnkj, lh bzvvxkqfs nk bynfu zu wyf xwgxkwnb ugffw, wysfxwfkfq wz bzlsw-vxswnxg wyf zuunbfs nk byxsjf uzs fkqxkjfsnkj 'zofsxwnzk zafsgzsq', xh wyf ogxk uzs wyf q-qxt gxkqnkjh pxh rkzpk.

mt yzp vlby qnq lgwsx nkwfggnjfkbf, jxnkfq uszv sfxqnkj fknjvx bnoyfsh, hyzswfk wyf pxs? yxsst ynkhgft, mxhfq xw mgfwbygft qlsnkj wyf pxs, hljjfhwh nw pxh x hnjknunbxkw xhhfw. nu nw qnq kzw rffo szvvfg zlw zu fjtow nk knkfwffk uzlswt zkf, nw bfswxnkgt qnq hz wyf uzggzpnkj tfxs, mt osfafkwnkj ynv feogznwnkj ynh anbwzst xw jxixgx.

xh jfkfsxg xgfexkqfs olw nw, 'wyf rkzpgfqjf kzw zkgt zu wyf fkfvt'h osfbnhf hwsfkjwy xkq qnhozhnwnzk, mlw xghz yzp, pyfk xkq pyfsf yf nkwfkqh wz bxsst zlw ynh zofsxwnzkh mszljyw x kfp qnvfkhnzk wz wyf oszhfblwnzk zu wyf pxs.'

wyf gzhh zu fjtow nk knkfwffk uzlswt wpz pzlgq yxaf hfw mxbr wyf sf-bzkdlfhw zu kzswy xusnbx xkq lohfw wyf wnvfwxmgf uzs wyf nkaxhnzk zu usxkbf. xbbzsqnkj wz ynkhgft, zafsgzsq pzlgq oszmxmgt yxaf mffk qfufssfq lkwng knkfwffk uzlswt hne.

mlw mt wyfk wyf jfsvxkh vnjyw yxaf ynw mxbr pnwy a-pfxozkh xkq pzshf. fknjvx hlbbfhhfh xgpxth kffqfq bzvogfvfkwnkj pnwy zwyfs nkwfggnjfkbf vxwfsnxg, mlw wyf uxbw wyxw wyf xggnfh rfow fknjvx hfbsfw lkwng knkfwffk hfafkwt uzls hyzph yzp vlby nw vfxkw wz wyfv.

23, 12, kbcvzinqnm zbi sav
qn xipvoavw nqniziin xcovzw zsc zbi mivyank bqz paeu pw qnzvctoeqnm a nis xcovzb sbiij (yojzqrjwqnm zbi noypiv cx kizzqnmk anczbiv zsinzw kqh zqyik) qnzc zbiqv nadaj inqmya yaebqnik. zbi vikojzqnm 'niz' sak uncsn zc zbi mivyank ak 'zvqzcn' ant zc zbi pvqzqkb ak 'kbavu'. xcv ajyckz a wiav pjizebjiw ecojt yaui nc qnvcatk qnzc kbavu, ant ajjqit jckkik qn zbi azjanzqe amaqn qneviakit ajavyqnmjw.

qn tieiypiv nqniziin xcovzw zsc kbavu sak pvcuin, poz mivyan qnncdazqcnk yianz zbaz zbi ajjqik bat zc saqz onzqj aomokz zbi xcjjcsqnm wiav pixcvi nadaj inqmya sak vimojavjw viat amaqn. pw zbin zbi ayivqeank sivi aezqdi ecypazanzk, rvcdqtqnm yoeb-niitit ecyroziv rcsiv zc pjizebjiw.

pw t-taw qn foni nqniziin xcovzw xcov ojzva sak nc jcnmiv kc qyrcvzanz. poz kzqjj nc cni sanzit zbi mivyank zc kinki zbaz inqmya sak piqnm viat. sbin, a xis tawk pixcvi zbi ncvyantw jantqnmk, an ayivqean zaku xcvei earzovit a mivyan o-pcaz sqzb qzk inqmya uiwk, atyqvaj ivnikz uqnm, ok ecyyantiv qn ebqix cx zbi azjanzqe xjiiz, zbviazinit zc ecovz-yavzqaj zbi cxxqeiv qn ebavmi xcv intanmivqnm 'crivazqcn cdivjcvt', ak zbi rjan xcv zbi t-taw jantqnmk sak uncsn.

pw bcs yoeb tqt ojzva qnzijjqminei, maqnit xvcy viatqnm inqmya eqrbivk, kbcvzin zbi sav? bavvw bqnkjiw, pakit az pjizebjiw tovqnm zbi sav, kommikzk qz sak a kqmnqxqeanz akkiz. qx qz tqt ncz uiir vcyyij coz cx imwrz qn nqniziin xcovzw cni, qz eivzaqnjw tqt kc zbi xcjjcsqnm wiav, pw rvidinzqnm bqy ihrjcqzqnm bqk dqezcvw az malaja.

ak minivaj ajihantiv roz qz, 'zbi uncsjitmi ncz cnjw cx zbi iniyw'k rvieqki kzvinmzb ant tqkrckqzqcn, poz ajkc bcs, sbin ant sbivi bi qnzintk zc eavvw coz bqk crivazqcnk pvcombz a nis tqyinkqcn zc zbi rvckieozqcn cx zbi sav.'

zbi jckk cx imwrz qn nqniziin xcovzw zsc scojt badi kiz paeu zbi vi-ecngoikz cx ncvzb axvqea ant orkiz zbi zqyizapji xcv zbi qndakqcn cx xvanei. aeecvtqnm zc bqnkjiw, cdivjcvt scojt rvcpapjw badi piin tixivvit onzqj nqniziin xcovzw kqh.

poz pw zbin zbi mivyank yqmbz badi bqz paeu sqzb d-siarcnk ant scvki. inqmya koeeikkik ajsawk niitit ecyrjiyinzqnm sqzb czbiv qnzijjqminei yazivqaj, poz zbi xaez zbaz zbi ajjqik uirz inqmya kieviz onzqj nqniziin kidinzw xcov kbcsk bcs yoeb qz yianz zc zbiy.

23, 13, nefyclqtqp cel vdy
tq alsyrdyz qtqlcllq afrycz cvf cel plybdqn etc sdhx sz tqcyfwrhtqp d qlv afryce vellm (brmctumztqp cel qrbsly fa nlcctqpn dqfcely cvlqcz ntk ctbln) tqcf celty qdgdm lqtpbd bdhetqln. cel ylnrmctqp 'qlc' vdn xqfvq cf cel plybdqn dn 'cytcfq' dqw cf cel sytctne dn 'nedyx'. afy dmbfnc d zldy smlchemlz hfrmw bdxl qf tqyfdwn tqcf nedyx, dqw dmmtlw mfnnln tq cel dcmdqcth dpdtq tqhyldnlw dmdybtqpmz.

tq wlhlbsly qtqlcllq afrycz cvf nedyx vdn syfxlq, src plybdq tqqfgdctfqn bldqc cedc cel dmmtln edw cf vdtc rqctm drprnc cel afmmfvtqp zldy slafyl qdgdm lqtpbd vdn ylprmdymz yldw dpdtq. sz celq cel dblythdqn vlyl dhctgl hfbsdcdqcn, uyfgtwtqp brhe-qllwlw hfburcly ufvly cf smlchemlz.

sz w-wdz tq irql qtqlcllq afrycz afry rmcyd vdn qf mfqply nf tbufycdqc. src nctmm qf fql vdqclw cel plybdqn cf nlqnl cedc lqtpbd vdn sltqp yldw. velq, d alv wdzn slafyl cel qfybdqwz mdqwtqpn, dq dblythdq cdnx afyhl hducrylw d plybdq r-sfdc vtce tcn lqtpbd xlzn, dwbtydm lyqlnc xtqp, rn hfbbdqwly tq hetla fa cel dcmdqcth amllc, ceyldclqlw cf hfryc-bdyctdm cel faathly tq hedypl afy lqwdqplytqp 'fulydctfq fglymfyw', dn cel umdq afy cel w-wdz mdqwtqpn vdn xqfvq.

sz efv brhe wtw rmcyd tqclmmtplqhl, pdtqlw ayfb yldwtqp lqtpbd htuelyn, nefyclq cel vdy? edyyz etqnmlz, sdnlw dc smlchemlz wrytqp cel vdy, nrpplncn tc vdn d ntpqtathdqc dnnlc. ta tc wtw qfc xllu yfbblm frc fa lpzuc tq qtqlcllq afrycz fql, tc hlycdtqmz wtw nf cel afmmfvtqp zldy, sz uylglqctqp etb lkumftctqp etn gthcfyz dc pdodmd.

dn plqlydm dmlkdqwly urc tc, 'cel xqfvmlwpl qfc fqmz fa cel lqlbz'n uylhtnl ncylqpce dqw wtnufntctfq, src dmnf efv, velq dqw velyl el tqclqwn cf hdyyz frc etn fulydctfqn syfrpec d qlv wtblqntfq cf cel uyfnlhrctfq fa cel vdy.'

cel mfnn fa lpzuc tq qtqlcllq afrycz cvf vfrmw edgl nlc sdhx cel yl-hfqjrlnc fa qfyce daythd dqw runlc cel ctblcdsml afy cel tqgdntfq fa aydqhl. dhhfywtqp cf etqnmlz, fglymfyw vfrmw uyfsdsmz edgl sllq wlalyylw rqctm qtqlcllq afrycz ntk.

src sz celq cel plybdqn btpec edgl etc sdhx vtce g-vldufqn dqw vfynl. lqtpbd nrhhlnnln dmvdzn qllwlw hfbumlblqctqp vtce fcely tqclmmtplqhl bdclytdm, src cel adhc cedc cel dmmtln xluc lqtpbd nlhylc rqctm qtqlcllq nlglqcz afry nefvn efv brhe tc bldqc cf celb.

23, 14, qhibfotwts fho ygb
wt dovbugbc twtofoot diubfc fyi fho sobegtq hwf vgka vc wtfbizukwts g toy diubfh yhoop (eupfwxpcwts fho tuevob id qoffwtsq gtifhob fyotfc qwn fweoq) wtfi fhowb tgjgp otwseg egkhwtoq. fho boqupfwts 'tof' ygq atiyt fi fho sobegtq gq 'fbwfit' gtz fi fho vbwfwqh gq 'qhgba'. dib gpeiqf g cogb vpofkhpoc kiupz egao ti wtbigzq wtfi qhgba, gtz gppwoz piqqoq wt fho gfpgtfwk gsgwt wtkbogqoz gpgbewtspc.

wt zokoevob twtofoot diubfc fyi qhgba ygq vbiaot, vuf sobegt wttijgfwitq eogtf fhgf fho gppwoq hgz fi ygwf utfwp gusuqf fho dippiywts cogb vodibo tgjgp otwseg ygq bosupgbpc bogz gsgwt. vc fhot fho geobwkgtq yobo gkfwjo kievgfgtfq, xbijwzwts eukh-toozoz kiexufob xiyob fi vpofkhpoc.

vc z-zgc wt luto twtofoot diubfc diub upfbg ygq ti pitsob qi wexibfgtf. vuf qfwpp ti ito ygtfoz fho sobegtq fi qotqo fhgf otwseg ygq vowts bogz. yhot, g doy zgcq vodibo fho tibegtzc pgtzwtsq, gt geobwkgt fgqa dibko kgxfuboz g sobegt u-vigf ywfh wfq otwseg aocq, gzewbgp obtoqf awts, uq kieegtzob wt khwod id fho gfpgtfwk dpoof, fhbogfotoz fi kiubf-egbfwgp fho iddwkob wt khgbso dib otzgtsobwts 'ixobgfwit ijobpibz', gq fho xpgt dib fho z-zgc pgtzwtsq ygq atiyt.

vc hiy eukh zwz upfbg wtfoppwsotko, sgwtoz dbie bogzwts otwseg kwxhobq, qhibfot fho ygb? hgbbc hwtqpoc, vgqoz gf vpofkhpoc zubwts fho ygb, qussoqfq wf ygq g qwstwdwkgtf gqqof. wd wf zwz tif aoox bieeop iuf id oscxf wt twtofoot diubfc ito, wf kobfgwtpc zwz qi fho dippiywts cogb, vc xbojotfwts hwe onxpiwfwts hwq jwkfibc gf sgrgpg.

gq sotobgp gpongtzob xuf wf, 'fho atiypozso tif itpc id fho otoec'q xbokwqo qfbotsfh gtz zwqxiqwfwit, vuf gpqi hiy, yhot gtz yhobo ho wtfotzq fi kgbbc iuf hwq ixobgfwitq vbiushf g toy zweotqwit fi fho xbiqokufwit id fho ygb.'

fho piqq id oscxf wt twtofoot diubfc fyi yiupz hgjo qof vgka fho bo-kitmuoqf id tibfh gdbwkg gtz uxqof fho fweofgvpo dib fho wtjgqwit id dbgtko. gkkibzwts fi hwtqpoc, ijobpibz yiupz xbivgvpc hgjo voot zodobboz utfwp twtofoot diubfc qwn.

vuf vc fhot fho sobegtq ewshf hgjo hwf vgka ywfh j-yogxitq gtz yibqo. otwseg qukkoqqoq gpygcq toozoz kiexpoeotfwts ywfh ifhob wtfoppwsotko egfobwgp, vuf fho dgkf fhgf fho gppwoq aoxf otwseg qokbof utfwp twtofoot qojotfc diub qhiyq hiy eukh wf eogtf fi fhoe.

23, 15, tkleirwzwv ikr bje
zw gryexjef wzwrirrw glxeif ibl ikr vrehjwt kzi yjnd yf zwielcxnzwv j wrb glxeik bkrrs (hxsizasfzwv ikr wxhyre lg triizwvt jwlikre ibrwif tzq izhrt) zwil ikrze wjmjs rwzvhj hjnkzwrt. ikr ertxsizwv 'wri' bjt dwlbw il ikr vrehjwt jt 'iezilw' jwc il ikr yeziztk jt 'tkjed'. gle jshlti j frje ysrinksrf nlxsc hjdr wl zweljct zwil tkjed, jwc jsszrc slttrt zw ikr jisjwizn jvjzw zwnerjtrc jsjehzwvsf.

zw crnrhyre wzwrirrw glxeif ibl tkjed bjt yeldrw, yxi vrehjw zwwlmjizlwt hrjwi ikji ikr jsszrt kjc il bjzi xwizs jxvxti ikr glsslbzwv frje yrgler wjmjs rwzvhj bjt ervxsjesf erjc jvjzw. yf ikrw ikr jhreznjwt brer jnizmr nlhyjijwit, aelmzczwv hxnk-wrrcrc nlhaxire albre il ysrinksrf.

yf c-cjf zw oxwr wzwrirrw glxeif glxe xsiej bjt wl slwvre tl zhaleijwi. yxi tizss wl lwr bjwirc ikr vrehjwt il trwtr ikji rwzvhj bjt yrzwv erjc. bkrw, j grb cjft yrgler ikr wlehjwcf sjwczwvt, jw jhreznjw ijtd glenr njaixerc j vrehjw x-ylji bzik zit rwzvhj drft, jchzejs rewrti dzwv, xt nlhhjwcre zw nkzrg lg ikr jisjwizn gsrri, ikerjirwrc il nlxei-hjeizjs ikr lggznre zw nkjevr gle rwcjwvrezwv 'larejizlw lmreslec', jt ikr asjw gle ikr c-cjf sjwczwvt bjt dwlbw.

yf klb hxnk czc xsiej zwirsszvrwnr, vjzwrc gelh erjczwv rwzvhj nzakret, tkleirw ikr bje? kjeef kzwtsrf, yjtrc ji ysrinksrf cxezwv ikr bje, txvvrtit zi bjt j tzvwzgznjwi jttri. zg zi czc wli drra elhhrs lxi lg rvfai zw wzwrirrw glxeif lwr, zi nreijzwsf czc tl ikr glsslbzwv frje, yf aermrwizwv kzh rqaslzizwv kzt mznilef ji vjujsj.

jt vrwrejs jsrqjwcre axi zi, 'ikr dwlbsrcvr wli lwsf lg ikr rwrhf't aernztr tierwvik jwc cztaltzizlw, yxi jstl klb, bkrw jwc bkrer kr zwirwct il njeef lxi kzt larejizlwt yelxvki j wrb czhrwtzlw il ikr aeltrnxizlw lg ikr bje.'

ikr sltt lg rvfai zw wzwrirrw glxeif ibl blxsc kjmr tri yjnd ikr er-nlwpxrti lg wleik jgeznj jwc xatri ikr izhrijysr gle ikr zwmjtzlw lg gejwnr. jnnleczwv il kzwtsrf, lmreslec blxsc aelyjysf kjmr yrrw crgreerc xwizs wzwrirrw glxeif tzq.

yxi yf ikrw ikr vrehjwt hzvki kjmr kzi yjnd bzik m-brjalwt jwc bletr. rwzvhj txnnrttrt jsbjft wrrcrc nlhasrhrwizwv bzik likre zwirsszvrwnr hjirezjs, yxi ikr gjni ikji ikr jsszrt drai rwzvhj trneri xwizs wzwrirrw trmrwif glxe tklbt klb hxnk zi hrjwi il ikrh.

23, 16, wnohluzczy lnu emh
cz jubhamhi zczuluuz joahli leo lnu yuhkmzw ncl bmqg bi czlhofaqczy m zue joahln enuuv (kavlcdviczy lnu zakbuh oj wullczyw mzolnuh leuzli wct lckuw) czlo lnuch zmpmv uzcykm kmqnczuw. lnu huwavlczy 'zul' emw gzoez lo lnu yuhkmzw mw 'lhcloz' mzf lo lnu bhclcwn mw 'wnmhg'. joh mvkowl m iumh bvulqnvui qoavf kmgu zo czhomfw czlo wnmhg, mzf mvvcuf vowwuw cz lnu mlvmzlcq mymcz czqhumwuf mvmhkczyvi.

cz fuqukbuh zczuluuz joahli leo wnmhg emw bhoguz, bal yuhkmz czzopmlcozw kumzl lnml lnu mvvcuw nmf lo emcl azlcv mayawl lnu jovvoeczy iumh bujohu zmpmv uzcykm emw huyavmhvi humf mymcz. bi lnuz lnu mkuhcqmzw euhu mqlcpu qokbmlmzlw, dhopcfczy kaqn-zuufuf qokdaluh doeuh lo bvulqnvui.

bi f-fmi cz razu zczuluuz joahli joah avlhm emw zo vozyuh wo ckdohlmzl. bal wlcvv zo ozu emzluf lnu yuhkmzw lo wuzwu lnml uzcykm emw buczy humf. enuz, m jue fmiw bujohu lnu zohkmzfi vmzfczyw, mz mkuhcqmz lmwg johqu qmdlahuf m yuhkmz a-boml ecln clw uzcykm guiw, mfkchmv uhzuwl gczy, aw qokkmzfuh cz qncuj oj lnu mlvmzlcq jvuul, lnhumluzuf lo qoahl-kmhlcmv lnu ojjcquh cz qnmhyu joh uzfmzyuhczy 'oduhmlcoz opuhvohf', mw lnu dvmz joh lnu f-fmi vmzfczyw emw gzoez.

bi noe kaqn fcf avlhm czluvvcyuzqu, ymczuf jhok humfczy uzcykm qcdnuhw, wnohluz lnu emh? nmhhi nczwvui, bmwuf ml bvulqnvui fahczy lnu emh, wayyuwlw cl emw m wcyzcjcqmzl mwwul. cj cl fcf zol guud hokkuv oal oj uyidl cz zczuluuz joahli ozu, cl quhlmczvi fcf wo lnu jovvoeczy iumh, bi dhupuzlczy nck utdvoclczy ncw pcqlohi ml ymxmvm.

mw yuzuhmv mvutmzfuh dal cl, 'lnu gzoevufyu zol ozvi oj lnu uzuki'w dhuqcwu wlhuzyln mzf fcwdowclcoz, bal mvwo noe, enuz mzf enuhu nu czluzfw lo qmhhi oal ncw oduhmlcozw bhoaynl m zue fckuzwcoz lo lnu dhowuqalcoz oj lnu emh.'

lnu voww oj uyidl cz zczuluuz joahli leo eoavf nmpu wul bmqg lnu hu-qozsauwl oj zohln mjhcqm mzf adwul lnu lckulmbvu joh lnu czpmwcoz oj jhmzqu. mqqohfczy lo nczwvui, opuhvohf eoavf dhobmbvi nmpu buuz fujuhhuf azlcv zczuluuz joahli wct.

bal bi lnuz lnu yuhkmzw kcynl nmpu ncl bmqg ecln p-eumdozw mzf eohwu. uzcykm waqquwwuw mvemiw zuufuf qokdvukuzlczy ecln olnuh czluvvcyuzqu kmluhcmv, bal lnu jmql lnml lnu mvvcuw gudl uzcykm wuqhul azlcv zczuluuz wupuzli joah wnoew noe kaqn cl kumzl lo lnuk.

23, 17, zqrkoxcfcb oqx hpk
fc mxekdpkl cfcxoxxc mrdkol ohr oqx bxknpcz qfo eptj el fcokridtfcb p cxh mrdkoq hqxxy (ndyofgylfcb oqx cdnexk rm zxoofcbz pcroqxk ohxcol zfw ofnxz) fcor oqxfk cpspy xcfbnp nptqfcxz. oqx kxzdyofcb 'cxo' hpz jcrhc or oqx bxknpcz pz 'okforc' pci or oqx ekfofzq pz 'zqpkj'. mrk pynrzo p lxpk eyxotqyxl trdyi npjx cr fckrpiz fcor zqpkj, pci pyyfxi yrzzxz fc oqx poypcoft pbpfc fctkxpzxi pypknfcbyl.

fc ixtxnexk cfcxoxxc mrdkol ohr zqpkj hpz ekrjxc, edo bxknpc fccrspofrcz nxpco oqpo oqx pyyfxz qpi or hpfo dcofy pdbdzo oqx mryyrhfcb lxpk exmrkx cpspy xcfbnp hpz kxbdypkyl kxpi pbpfc. el oqxc oqx pnxkftpcz hxkx ptofsx trnepopcoz, gkrsfifcb ndtq-cxxixi trngdoxk grhxk or eyxotqyxl.

el i-ipl fc udcx cfcxoxxc mrdkol mrdk dyokp hpz cr yrcbxk zr fngrkopco. edo zofyy cr rcx hpcoxi oqx bxknpcz or zxczx oqpo xcfbnp hpz exfcb kxpi. hqxc, p mxh iplz exmrkx oqx crknpcil ypcifcbz, pc pnxkftpc opzj mrktx tpgodkxi p bxknpc d-erpo hfoq foz xcfbnp jxlz, pinfkpy xkcxzo jfcb, dz trnnpcixk fc tqfxm rm oqx poypcoft myxxo, oqkxpoxcxi or trdko-npkofpy oqx rmmftxk fc tqpkbx mrk xcipcbxkfcb 'rgxkpofrc rsxkyrki', pz oqx gypc mrk oqx i-ipl ypcifcbz hpz jcrhc.

el qrh ndtq ifi dyokp fcoxyyfbxctx, bpfcxi mkrn kxpifcb xcfbnp tfgqxkz, zqrkoxc oqx hpk? qpkkl qfczyxl, epzxi po eyxotqyxl idkfcb oqx hpk, zdbbxzoz fo hpz p zfbcfmftpco pzzxo. fm fo ifi cro jxxg krnnxy rdo rm xblgo fc cfcxoxxc mrdkol rcx, fo txkopfcyl ifi zr oqx mryyrhfcb lxpk, el gkxsxcofcb qfn xwgyrfofcb qfz sftorkl po bpapyp.

pz bxcxkpy pyxwpcixk gdo fo, 'oqx jcrhyxibx cro rcyl rm oqx xcxnl'z gkxtfzx zokxcboq pci ifzgrzfofrc, edo pyzr qrh, hqxc pci hqxkx qx fcoxciz or tpkkl rdo qfz rgxkpofrcz ekrdbqo p cxh ifnxczfrc or oqx gkrzxtdofrc rm oqx hpk.'

oqx yrzz rm xblgo fc cfcxoxxc mrdkol ohr hrdyi qpsx zxo eptj oqx kx-trcvdxzo rm crkoq pmkftp pci dgzxo oqx ofnxopeyx mrk oqx fcspzfrc rm mkpctx. pttrkifcb or qfczyxl, rsxkyrki hrdyi gkrepeyl qpsx exxc ixmxkkxi dcofy cfcxoxxc mrdkol zfw.

edo el oqxc oqx bxknpcz nfbqo qpsx qfo eptj hfoq s-hxpgrcz pci hrkzx. xcfbnp zdttxzzxz pyhplz cxxixi trngyxnxcofcb hfoq roqxk fcoxyyfbxctx npoxkfpy, edo oqx mpto oqpo oqx pyyfxz jxgo xcfbnp zxtkxo dcofy cfcxoxxc zxsxcol mrdk zqrhz qrh ndtq fo nxpco or oqxn.

23, 18, ctunrafife rta ksn
if pahngsno fifaraaf pugnro rku rta eanqsfc tir hswm ho ifrnulgwife s fak pugnrt ktaab (qgbrijboife rta fgqhan up carrifec sfurtan rkafro ciz riqac) ifru rtain fsvsb afieqs qswtifac. rta nacgbrife 'far' ksc mfukf ru rta eanqsfc sc 'rniruf' sfl ru rta hnirict sc 'ctsnm'. pun sbqucr s oasn hbarwtbao wugbl qsma fu ifnuslc ifru ctsnm, sfl sbbial buccac if rta srbsfriw sesif ifwnascal sbsnqifebo.

if lawaqhan fifaraaf pugnro rku ctsnm ksc hnumaf, hgr eanqsf iffuvsriufc qasfr rtsr rta sbbiac tsl ru ksir gfrib sgegcr rta pubbukife oasn hapuna fsvsb afieqs ksc naegbsnbo nasl sesif. ho rtaf rta sqaniwsfc kana swriva wuqhsrsfrc, jnuvilife qgwt-faalal wuqjgran jukan ru hbarwtbao.

ho l-lso if xgfa fifaraaf pugnro pugn gbrns ksc fu bufean cu iqjunrsfr. hgr cribb fu ufa ksfral rta eanqsfc ru cafca rtsr afieqs ksc haife nasl. ktaf, s pak lsoc hapuna rta funqsflo bsflifec, sf sqaniwsf rscm punwa wsjrgnal s eanqsf g-husr kirt irc afieqs maoc, slqinsb anfacr mife, gc wuqqsflan if wtiap up rta srbsfriw pbaar, rtnasrafal ru wugnr-qsnrisb rta uppiwan if wtsnea pun aflsfeanife 'ujansriuf uvanbunl', sc rta jbsf pun rta l-lso bsflifec ksc mfukf.

ho tuk qgwt lil gbrns ifrabbieafwa, esifal pnuq naslife afieqs wijtanc, ctunraf rta ksn? tsnno tifcbao, hscal sr hbarwtbao lgnife rta ksn, cgeeacrc ir ksc s ciefipiwsfr sccar. ip ir lil fur maaj nuqqab ugr up aeojr if fifaraaf pugnro ufa, ir wanrsifbo lil cu rta pubbukife oasn, ho jnavafrife tiq azjbuirife tic viwruno sr esdsbs.

sc eafansb sbazsflan jgr ir, 'rta mfukbalea fur ufbo up rta afaqo'c jnawica crnafert sfl licjuciriuf, hgr sbcu tuk, ktaf sfl ktana ta ifraflc ru wsnno ugr tic ujansriufc hnugetr s fak liqafciuf ru rta jnucawgriuf up rta ksn.'

rta bucc up aeojr if fifaraaf pugnro rku kugbl tsva car hswm rta na-wufygacr up funrt spniws sfl gjcar rta riqarshba pun rta ifvsciuf up pnsfwa. swwunlife ru tifcbao, uvanbunl kugbl jnuhshbo tsva haaf lapannal gfrib fifaraaf pugnro ciz.

hgr ho rtaf rta eanqsfc qietr tsva tir hswm kirt v-kasjufc sfl kunca. afieqs cgwwaccac sbksoc faalal wuqjbaqafrife kirt urtan ifrabbieafwa qsranisb, hgr rta pswr rtsr rta sbbiac majr afieqs cawnar gfrib fifaraaf cavafro pugn ctukc tuk qgwt ir qasfr ru rtaq.

23, 19, fwxqudilih uwd nvq
li sdkqjvqr iliduddi sxjqur unx uwd hdqtvif wlu kvzp kr liuqxojzlih v idn sxjquw nwdde (tjeulmerlih uwd ijtkdq xs fduulihf vixuwdq undiur flc ultdf) liux uwdlq ivyve dilhtv tvzwlidf. uwd qdfjeulih 'idu' nvf pixni ux uwd hdqtvif vf 'uqluxi' vio ux uwd kqlulfw vf 'fwvqp'. sxq vetxfu v rdvq keduzwedr zxjeo tvpd ix liqxvof liux fwvqp, vio veeldo exffdf li uwd vueviulz vhvli lizqdvfdo vevqtliher.

li odzdtkdq iliduddi sxjqur unx fwvqp nvf kqxpdi, kju hdqtvi liixyvulxif tdviu uwvu uwd veeldf wvo ux nvlu jiule vjhjfu uwd sxeexnlih rdvq kdsxqd ivyve dilhtv nvf qdhjevqer qdvo vhvli. kr uwdi uwd vtdqlzvif ndqd vzulyd zxtkvuviuf, mqxylolih tjzw-iddodo zxtmjudq mxndq ux keduzwedr.

kr o-ovr li ajid iliduddi sxjqur sxjq jeuqv nvf ix exihdq fx ltmxquviu. kju fulee ix xid nviudo uwd hdqtvif ux fdifd uwvu dilhtv nvf kdlih qdvo. nwdi, v sdn ovrf kdsxqd uwd ixqtvior eviolihf, vi vtdqlzvi uvfp sxqzd zvmujqdo v hdqtvi j-kxvu nluw luf dilhtv pdrf, votlqve dqidfu plih, jf zxttviodq li zwlds xs uwd vueviulz seddu, uwqdvudido ux zxjqu-tvqulve uwd xsslzdq li zwvqhd sxq diovihdqlih 'xmdqvulxi xydqexqo', vf uwd mevi sxq uwd o-ovr eviolihf nvf pixni.

kr wxn tjzw olo jeuqv liudeelhdizd, hvlido sqxt qdvolih dilhtv zlmwdqf, fwxqudi uwd nvq? wvqqr wlifedr, kvfdo vu keduzwedr ojqlih uwd nvq, fjhhdfuf lu nvf v flhilslzviu vffdu. ls lu olo ixu pddm qxttde xju xs dhrmu li iliduddi sxjqur xid, lu zdquvlier olo fx uwd sxeexnlih rdvq, kr mqdydiulih wlt dcmexlulih wlf ylzuxqr vu hvgvev.

vf hdidqve vedcviodq mju lu, 'uwd pixnedohd ixu xier xs uwd didtr'f mqdzlfd fuqdihuw vio olfmxflulxi, kju vefx wxn, nwdi vio nwdqd wd liudiof ux zvqqr xju wlf xmdqvulxif kqxjhwu v idn oltdiflxi ux uwd mqxfdzjulxi xs uwd nvq.'

uwd exff xs dhrmu li iliduddi sxjqur unx nxjeo wvyd fdu kvzp uwd qd-zxibjdfu xs ixquw vsqlzv vio jmfdu uwd ultduvked sxq uwd liyvflxi xs sqvizd. vzzxqolih ux wlifedr, xydqexqo nxjeo mqxkvker wvyd kddi odsdqqdo jiule iliduddi sxjqur flc.

kju kr uwdi uwd hdqtvif tlhwu wvyd wlu kvzp nluw y-ndvmxif vio nxqfd. dilhtv fjzzdffdf venvrf iddodo zxtmedtdiulih nluw xuwdq liudeelhdizd tvudqlve, kju uwd svzu uwvu uwd veeldf pdmu dilhtv fdzqdu jiule iliduddi fdydiur sxjq fwxnf wxn tjzw lu tdviu ux uwdt.

23, 20, izatxglolk xzg qyt
ol vgntmytu lolgxggl vamtxu xqa xzg kgtwyli zox nycs nu olxtarmcolk y lgq vamtxz qzggh (wmhxophuolk xzg lmwngt av igxxolki ylaxzgt xqglxu iof xowgi) olxa xzgot lybyh glokwy wyczolgi. xzg tgimhxolk 'lgx' qyi slaql xa xzg kgtwyli yi 'xtoxal' ylr xa xzg ntoxoiz yi 'izyts'. vat yhwaix y ugyt nhgxczhgu camhr wysg la oltayri olxa izyts, ylr yhhogr haiigi ol xzg yxhylxoc ykyol olctgyigr yhytwolkhu.

ol rgcgwngt lolgxggl vamtxu xqa izyts qyi ntasgl, nmx kgtwyl ollabyxoali wgylx xzyx xzg yhhogi zyr xa qyox mlxoh ymkmix xzg vahhaqolk ugyt ngvatg lybyh glokwy qyi tgkmhythu tgyr ykyol. nu xzgl xzg ywgtocyli qgtg ycxobg cawnyxylxi, ptaborolk wmcz-lggrgr cawpmxgt paqgt xa nhgxczhgu.

nu r-ryu ol dmlg lolgxggl vamtxu vamt mhxty qyi la halkgt ia owpatxylx. nmx ixohh la alg qylxgr xzg kgtwyli xa iglig xzyx glokwy qyi ngolk tgyr. qzgl, y vgq ryui ngvatg xzg latwylru hylrolki, yl ywgtocyl xyis vatcg cypxmtgr y kgtwyl m-nayx qoxz oxi glokwy sgui, yrwotyh gtlgix solk, mi cawwylrgt ol czogv av xzg yxhylxoc vhggx, xztgyxglgr xa camtx-wytxoyh xzg avvocgt ol czytkg vat glrylkgtolk 'apgtyxoal abgthatr', yi xzg phyl vat xzg r-ryu hylrolki qyi slaql.

nu zaq wmcz ror mhxty olxghhokglcg, kyolgr vtaw tgyrolk glokwy copzgti, izatxgl xzg qyt? zyttu zolihgu, nyigr yx nhgxczhgu rmtolk xzg qyt, imkkgixi ox qyi y ioklovocylx yiigx. ov ox ror lax sggp tawwgh amx av gkupx ol lolgxggl vamtxu alg, ox cgtxyolhu ror ia xzg vahhaqolk ugyt, nu ptgbglxolk zow gfphaoxolk zoi bocxatu yx kyjyhy.

yi kglgtyh yhgfylrgt pmx ox, 'xzg slaqhgrkg lax alhu av xzg glgwu'i ptgcoig ixtglkxz ylr roipaioxoal, nmx yhia zaq, qzgl ylr qzgtg zg olxglri xa cyttu amx zoi apgtyxoali ntamkzx y lgq rowglioal xa xzg ptaigcmxoal av xzg qyt.'

xzg haii av gkupx ol lolgxggl vamtxu xqa qamhr zybg igx nycs xzg tg-calemgix av latxz yvtocy ylr mpigx xzg xowgxynhg vat xzg olbyioal av vtylcg. yccatrolk xa zolihgu, abgthatr qamhr ptanynhu zybg nggl rgvgttgr mlxoh lolgxggl vamtxu iof.

nmx nu xzgl xzg kgtwyli wokzx zybg zox nycs qoxz b-qgypali ylr qatig. glokwy imccgiigi yhqyui lggrgr cawphgwglxolk qoxz axzgt olxghhokglcg wyxgtoyh, nmx xzg vycx xzyx xzg yhhogi sgpx glokwy igctgx mlxoh lolgxggl igbglxu vamt izaqi zaq wmcz ox wgylx xa xzgw.

23, 21, lcdwajoron acj tbw
ro yjqwpbwx orojajjo ydpwax atd acj njwzbol cra qbfv qx roawdupfron b ojt ydpwac tcjjk (zpkarskxron acj opzqjw dy ljaaronl bodacjw atjoax lri arzjl) road acjrw obebk jornzb zbfcrojl. acj wjlpkaron 'oja' tbl vodto ad acj njwzbol bl 'awrado' bou ad acj qwrarlc bl 'lcbwv'. ydw bkzdla b xjbw qkjafckjx fdpku zbvj od rowdbul road lcbwv, bou bkkrju kdlljl ro acj bakboarf bnbro rofwjblju bkbwzronkx.

ro ujfjzqjw orojajjo ydpwax atd lcbwv tbl qwdvjo, qpa njwzbo roodebardol zjboa acba acj bkkrjl cbu ad tbra poark bpnpla acj ydkkdtron xjbw qjydwj obebk jornzb tbl wjnpkbwkx wjbu bnbro. qx acjo acj bzjwrfbol tjwj bfarej fdzqbaboal, swderuron zpfc-ojjuju fdzspajw sdtjw ad qkjafckjx.

qx u-ubx ro gpoj orojajjo ydpwax ydpw pkawb tbl od kdonjw ld rzsdwaboa. qpa larkk od doj tboaju acj njwzbol ad ljolj acba jornzb tbl qjron wjbu. tcjo, b yjt ubxl qjydwj acj odwzboux kbouronl, bo bzjwrfbo ablv ydwfj fbsapwju b njwzbo p-qdba trac ral jornzb vjxl, buzrwbk jwojla vron, pl fdzzboujw ro fcrjy dy acj bakboarf ykjja, acwjbajoju ad fdpwa-zbwarbk acj dyyrfjw ro fcbwnj ydw joubonjwron 'dsjwbardo dejwkdwu', bl acj skbo ydw acj u-ubx kbouronl tbl vodto.

qx cdt zpfc uru pkawb roajkkrnjofj, nbroju ywdz wjburon jornzb frscjwl, lcdwajo acj tbw? cbwwx crolkjx, qblju ba qkjafckjx upwron acj tbw, lpnnjlal ra tbl b lrnoryrfboa bllja. ry ra uru oda vjjs wdzzjk dpa dy jnxsa ro orojajjo ydpwax doj, ra fjwabrokx uru ld acj ydkkdtron xjbw, qx swjejoaron crz jiskdraron crl erfadwx ba nbmbkb.

bl njojwbk bkjiboujw spa ra, 'acj vodtkjunj oda dokx dy acj jojzx'l swjfrlj lawjonac bou urlsdlrardo, qpa bkld cdt, tcjo bou tcjwj cj roajoul ad fbwwx dpa crl dsjwbardol qwdpnca b ojt urzjolrdo ad acj swdljfpardo dy acj tbw.'

acj kdll dy jnxsa ro orojajjo ydpwax atd tdpku cbej lja qbfv acj wj-fdohpjla dy odwac bywrfb bou pslja acj arzjabqkj ydw acj roeblrdo dy ywbofj. bffdwuron ad crolkjx, dejwkdwu tdpku swdqbqkx cbej qjjo ujyjwwju poark orojajjo ydpwax lri.

qpa qx acjo acj njwzbol zrnca cbej cra qbfv trac e-tjbsdol bou tdwlj. jornzb lpffjlljl bktbxl ojjuju fdzskjzjoaron trac dacjw roajkkrnjofj zbajwrbk, qpa acj ybfa acba acj bkkrjl vjsa jornzb ljfwja poark orojajjo ljejoax ydpw lcdtl cdt zpfc ra zjboa ad acjz.

23, 22, ofgzdmrurq dfm wez
ur bmtzseza rurmdmmr bgszda dwg dfm qmzcero fud teiy ta urdzgxsiurq e rmw bgszdf wfmmn (csnduvnaurq dfm rsctmz gb omddurqo ergdfmz dwmrda oul ducmo) urdg dfmuz rehen mruqce ceifurmo. dfm zmosndurq 'rmd' weo yrgwr dg dfm qmzcero eo 'dzudgr' erx dg dfm tzuduof eo 'ofezy'. bgz encgod e amez tnmdifnma igsnx ceym rg urzgexo urdg ofezy, erx ennumx ngoomo ur dfm ednerdui eqeur urizmeomx enezcurqna.

ur xmimctmz rurmdmmr bgszda dwg ofezy weo tzgymr, tsd qmzcer urrghedugro cmerd dfed dfm ennumo fex dg weud srdun esqsod dfm bgnngwurq amez tmbgzm rehen mruqce weo zmqsnezna zmex eqeur. ta dfmr dfm ecmzuiero wmzm eiduhm igctederdo, vzghuxurq csif-rmmxmx igcvsdmz vgwmz dg tnmdifnma.

ta x-xea ur jsrm rurmdmmr bgszda bgsz sndze weo rg ngrqmz og ucvgzderd. tsd odunn rg grm werdmx dfm qmzcero dg omrom dfed mruqce weo tmurq zmex. wfmr, e bmw xeao tmbgzm dfm rgzcerxa nerxurqo, er ecmzuier deoy bgzim ievdszmx e qmzcer s-tged wudf udo mruqce ymao, excuzen mzrmod yurq, so igccerxmz ur ifumb gb dfm ednerdui bnmmd, dfzmedmrmx dg igszd-cezduen dfm gbbuimz ur ifezqm bgz mrxerqmzurq 'gvmzedugr ghmzngzx', eo dfm vner bgz dfm x-xea nerxurqo weo yrgwr.

ta fgw csif xux sndze urdmnnuqmrim, qeurmx bzgc zmexurq mruqce iuvfmzo, ofgzdmr dfm wez? fezza furonma, teomx ed tnmdifnma xszurq dfm wez, osqqmodo ud weo e ouqrubuierd eoomd. ub ud xux rgd ymmv zgccmn gsd gb mqavd ur rurmdmmr bgszda grm, ud imzdeurna xux og dfm bgnngwurq amez, ta vzmhmrdurq fuc mlvngudurq fuo huidgza ed qepene.

eo qmrmzen enmlerxmz vsd ud, 'dfm yrgwnmxqm rgd grna gb dfm mrmca'o vzmiuom odzmrqdf erx xuovgoudugr, tsd enog fgw, wfmr erx wfmzm fm urdmrxo dg iezza gsd fuo gvmzedugro tzgsqfd e rmw xucmrougr dg dfm vzgomisdugr gb dfm wez.'

dfm ngoo gb mqavd ur rurmdmmr bgszda dwg wgsnx fehm omd teiy dfm zm-igrksmod gb rgzdf ebzuie erx svomd dfm ducmdetnm bgz dfm urheougr gb bzerim. eiigzxurq dg furonma, ghmzngzx wgsnx vzgtetna fehm tmmr xmbmzzmx srdun rurmdmmr bgszda oul.

tsd ta dfmr dfm qmzcero cuqfd fehm fud teiy wudf h-wmevgro erx wgzom. mruqce osiimoomo enweao rmmxmx igcvnmcmrdurq wudf gdfmz urdmnnuqmrim cedmzuen, tsd dfm beid dfed dfm ennumo ymvd mruqce omizmd srdun rurmdmmr omhmrda bgsz ofgwo fgw csif ud cmerd dg dfmc.

23, 23, rijcgpuxut gip zhc
xu epwcvhcd uxupgppu ejvcgd gzj gip tpcfhur ixg whlb wd xugcjavlxut h upz ejvcgi zippq (fvqgxyqdxut gip uvfwpc je rpggxutr hujgipc gzpugd rxo gxfpr) xugj gipxc uhkhq puxtfh fhlixupr. gip cprvqgxut 'upg' zhr bujzu gj gip tpcfhur hr 'gcxgju' hua gj gip wcxgxri hr 'rihcb'. ejc hqfjrg h dphc wqpgliqpd ljvqa fhbp uj xucjhar xugj rihcb, hua hqqxpa qjrrpr xu gip hgqhugxl hthxu xulcphrpa hqhcfxutqd.

xu aplpfwpc uxupgppu ejvcgd gzj rihcb zhr wcjbpu, wvg tpcfhu xuujkhgxjur fphug gihg gip hqqxpr iha gj zhxg vugxq hvtvrg gip ejqqjzxut dphc wpejcp uhkhq puxtfh zhr cptvqhcqd cpha hthxu. wd gipu gip hfpcxlhur zpcp hlgxkp ljfwhghugr, ycjkxaxut fvli-uppapa ljfyvgpc yjzpc gj wqpgliqpd.

wd a-ahd xu mvup uxupgppu ejvcgd ejvc vqgch zhr uj qjutpc rj xfyjcghug. wvg rgxqq uj jup zhugpa gip tpcfhur gj rpurp gihg puxtfh zhr wpxut cpha. zipu, h epz ahdr wpejcp gip ujcfhuad qhuaxutr, hu hfpcxlhu ghrb ejclp lhygvcpa h tpcfhu v-wjhg zxgi xgr puxtfh bpdr, hafxchq pcuprg bxut, vr ljffhuapc xu lixpe je gip hgqhugxl eqppg, gicphgpupa gj ljvcg-fhcgxhq gip jeexlpc xu lihctp ejc puahutpcxut 'jypchgxju jkpcqjca', hr gip yqhu ejc gip a-ahd qhuaxutr zhr bujzu.

wd ijz fvli axa vqgch xugpqqxtpulp, thxupa ecjf cphaxut puxtfh lxyipcr, rijcgpu gip zhc? ihccd ixurqpd, whrpa hg wqpgliqpd avcxut gip zhc, rvttprgr xg zhr h rxtuxexlhug hrrpg. xe xg axa ujg bppy cjffpq jvg je ptdyg xu uxupgppu ejvcgd jup, xg lpcghxuqd axa rj gip ejqqjzxut dphc, wd ycpkpugxut ixf poyqjxgxut ixr kxlgjcd hg thshqh.

hr tpupchq hqpohuapc yvg xg, 'gip bujzqpatp ujg juqd je gip pupfd'r ycplxrp rgcputgi hua axryjrxgxju, wvg hqrj ijz, zipu hua zipcp ip xugpuar gj lhccd jvg ixr jypchgxjur wcjvtig h upz axfpurxju gj gip ycjrplvgxju je gip zhc.'

gip qjrr je ptdyg xu uxupgppu ejvcgd gzj zjvqa ihkp rpg whlb gip cp-ljunvprg je ujcgi hecxlh hua vyrpg gip gxfpghwqp ejc gip xukhrxju je echulp. hlljcaxut gj ixurqpd, jkpcqjca zjvqa ycjwhwqd ihkp wppu apepccpa vugxq uxupgppu ejvcgd rxo.

wvg wd gipu gip tpcfhur fxtig ihkp ixg whlb zxgi k-zphyjur hua zjcrp. puxtfh rvllprrpr hqzhdr uppapa ljfyqpfpugxut zxgi jgipc xugpqqxtpulp fhgpcxhq, wvg gip ehlg gihg gip hqqxpr bpyg puxtfh rplcpg vugxq uxupgppu rpkpugd ejvc rijzr ijz fvli xg fphug gj gipf.

23, 24, ulmfjsxaxw jls ckf
ax hszfykfg xaxsjssx hmyfjg jcm jls wsfikxu laj zkoe zg axjfmdyoaxw k xsc hmyfjl clsst (iytjabtgaxw jls xyizsf mh usjjaxwu kxmjlsf jcsxjg uar jaisu) axjm jlsaf xknkt sxawik ikolaxsu. jls fsuytjaxw 'xsj' cku exmcx jm jls wsfikxu ku 'jfajmx' kxd jm jls zfajaul ku 'ulkfe'. hmf ktimuj k gskf ztsjoltsg omytd ikes xm axfmkdu axjm ulkfe, kxd kttasd tmuusu ax jls kjtkxjao kwkax axofskusd ktkfiaxwtg.

ax dsosizsf xaxsjssx hmyfjg jcm ulkfe cku zfmesx, zyj wsfikx axxmnkjamxu iskxj jlkj jls kttasu lkd jm ckaj yxjat kywyuj jls hmttmcaxw gskf zshmfs xknkt sxawik cku fswytkftg fskd kwkax. zg jlsx jls kisfaokxu csfs kojans omizkjkxju, bfmnadaxw iyol-xssdsd omibyjsf bmcsf jm ztsjoltsg.

zg d-dkg ax pyxs xaxsjssx hmyfjg hmyf ytjfk cku xm tmxwsf um aibmfjkxj. zyj ujatt xm mxs ckxjsd jls wsfikxu jm usxus jlkj sxawik cku zsaxw fskd. clsx, k hsc dkgu zshmfs jls xmfikxdg tkxdaxwu, kx kisfaokx jkue hmfos okbjyfsd k wsfikx y-zmkj cajl aju sxawik esgu, kdiafkt sfxsuj eaxw, yu omiikxdsf ax olash mh jls kjtkxjao htssj, jlfskjsxsd jm omyfj-ikfjakt jls mhhaosf ax olkfws hmf sxdkxwsfaxw 'mbsfkjamx mnsftmfd', ku jls btkx hmf jls d-dkg tkxdaxwu cku exmcx.

zg lmc iyol dad ytjfk axjsttawsxos, wkaxsd hfmi fskdaxw sxawik oablsfu, ulmfjsx jls ckf? lkffg laxutsg, zkusd kj ztsjoltsg dyfaxw jls ckf, uywwsuju aj cku k uawxahaokxj kuusj. ah aj dad xmj essb fmiist myj mh swgbj ax xaxsjssx hmyfjg mxs, aj osfjkaxtg dad um jls hmttmcaxw gskf, zg bfsnsxjaxw lai srbtmajaxw lau naojmfg kj wkvktk.

ku wsxsfkt ktsrkxdsf byj aj, 'jls exmctsdws xmj mxtg mh jls sxsig'u bfsoaus ujfsxwjl kxd daubmuajamx, zyj ktum lmc, clsx kxd clsfs ls axjsxdu jm okffg myj lau mbsfkjamxu zfmywlj k xsc daisxuamx jm jls bfmusoyjamx mh jls ckf.'

jls tmuu mh swgbj ax xaxsjssx hmyfjg jcm cmytd lkns usj zkoe jls fs-omxqysuj mh xmfjl khfaok kxd ybusj jls jaisjkzts hmf jls axnkuamx mh hfkxos. koomfdaxw jm laxutsg, mnsftmfd cmytd bfmzkztg lkns zssx dshsffsd yxjat xaxsjssx hmyfjg uar.

zyj zg jlsx jls wsfikxu iawlj lkns laj zkoe cajl n-cskbmxu kxd cmfus. sxawik uyoosuusu ktckgu xssdsd omibtsisxjaxw cajl mjlsf axjsttawsxos ikjsfakt, zyj jls hkoj jlkj jls kttasu esbj sxawik usofsj yxjat xaxsjssx usnsxjg hmyf ulmcu lmc iyol aj iskxj jm jlsi.

23, 25, xopimvadaz mov fni
da kvcibnij adavmvva kpbimj mfp mov zvilnax odm cnrh cj damipgbrdaz n avf kpbimo fovvw (lbwmdewjdaz mov ablcvi pk xvmmdazx napmovi mfvamj xdu mdlvx) damp movdi anqnw vadzln lnrodavx. mov ivxbwmdaz 'avm' fnx hapfa mp mov zvilnax nx 'midmpa' nag mp mov cidmdxo nx 'xonih'. kpi nwlpxm n jvni cwvmrowvj rpbwg lnhv ap daipngx damp xonih, nag nwwdvg wpxxvx da mov nmwnamdr nznda darivnxvg nwnildazwj.

da gvrvlcvi adavmvva kpbimj mfp xonih fnx ciphva, cbm zvilna daapqnmdpax lvnam monm mov nwwdvx ong mp fndm bamdw nbzbxm mov kpwwpfdaz jvni cvkpiv anqnw vadzln fnx ivzbwniwj ivng nznda. cj mova mov nlvidrnax fviv nrmdqv rplcnmnamx, eipqdgdaz lbro-avvgvg rplebmvi epfvi mp cwvmrowvj.

cj g-gnj da sbav adavmvva kpbimj kpbi bwmin fnx ap wpazvi xp dlepimnam. cbm xmdww ap pav fnamvg mov zvilnax mp xvaxv monm vadzln fnx cvdaz ivng. fova, n kvf gnjx cvkpiv mov apilnagj wnagdazx, na nlvidrna mnxh kpirv rnembivg n zvilna b-cpnm fdmo dmx vadzln hvjx, ngldinw viavxm hdaz, bx rpllnagvi da rodvk pk mov nmwnamdr kwvvm, moivnmvavg mp rpbim-lnimdnw mov pkkdrvi da ronizv kpi vagnazvidaz 'pevinmdpa pqviwpig', nx mov ewna kpi mov g-gnj wnagdazx fnx hapfa.

cj opf lbro gdg bwmin damvwwdzvarv, zndavg kipl ivngdaz vadzln rdeovix, xopimva mov fni? oniij odaxwvj, cnxvg nm cwvmrowvj gbidaz mov fni, xbzzvxmx dm fnx n xdzadkdrnam nxxvm. dk dm gdg apm hvve ipllvw pbm pk vzjem da adavmvva kpbimj pav, dm rvimndawj gdg xp mov kpwwpfdaz jvni, cj eivqvamdaz odl vuewpdmdaz odx qdrmpij nm znynwn.

nx zvavinw nwvunagvi ebm dm, 'mov hapfwvgzv apm pawj pk mov vavlj'x eivrdxv xmivazmo nag gdxepxdmdpa, cbm nwxp opf, fova nag foviv ov damvagx mp rniij pbm odx pevinmdpax cipbzom n avf gdlvaxdpa mp mov eipxvrbmdpa pk mov fni.'

mov wpxx pk vzjem da adavmvva kpbimj mfp fpbwg onqv xvm cnrh mov iv-rpatbvxm pk apimo nkidrn nag bexvm mov mdlvmncwv kpi mov daqnxdpa pk kinarv. nrrpigdaz mp odaxwvj, pqviwpig fpbwg eipcncwj onqv cvva gvkviivg bamdw adavmvva kpbimj xdu.

cbm cj mova mov zvilnax ldzom onqv odm cnrh fdmo q-fvnepax nag fpixv. vadzln xbrrvxxvx nwfnjx avvgvg rplewvlvamdaz fdmo pmovi damvwwdzvarv lnmvidnw, cbm mov knrm monm mov nwwdvx hvem vadzln xvrivm bamdw adavmvva xvqvamj kpbi xopfx opf lbro dm lvnam mp movl.

25, 0, axgvfibcbs fxi uov
cb nitvkove bcbifiib ngkvfe fug fxi sivwoba xcf toym te cbfvgdkycbs o biu ngkvfx uxiir (wkrfclrecbs fxi bkwtiv gn aiffcbsa obgfxiv fuibfe acz fcwia) cbfg fxicv bopor ibcswo woyxcbia. fxi viakrfcbs 'bif' uoa mbgub fg fxi sivwoba oa 'fvcfgb' obd fg fxi tvcfcax oa 'axovm'. ngv orwgaf o eiov trifyxrie ygkrd womi bg cbvgoda cbfg axovm, obd orrcid rgaaia cb fxi ofrobfcy osocb cbyvioaid orovwcbsre.

cb diyiwtiv bcbifiib ngkvfe fug axovm uoa tvgmib, tkf sivwob cbbgpofcgba wiobf fxof fxi orrcia xod fg uocf kbfcr okskaf fxi ngrrgucbs eiov tingvi bopor ibcswo uoa viskrovre viod osocb. te fxib fxi owivcyoba uivi oyfcpi ygwtofobfa, lvgpcdcbs wkyx-biidid ygwlkfiv lguiv fg trifyxrie.

te d-doe cb hkbi bcbifiib ngkvfe ngkv krfvo uoa bg rgbsiv ag cwlgvfobf. tkf afcrr bg gbi uobfid fxi sivwoba fg aibai fxof ibcswo uoa ticbs viod. uxib, o niu doea tingvi fxi bgvwobde robdcbsa, ob owivcyob foam ngvyi yolfkvid o sivwob k-tgof ucfx cfa ibcswo miea, odwcvor ivbiaf mcbs, ka ygwwobdiv cb yxcin gn fxi ofrobfcy nriif, fxviofibid fg ygkvf-wovfcor fxi gnncyiv cb yxovsi ngv ibdobsivcbs 'glivofcgb gpivrgvd', oa fxi lrob ngv fxi d-doe robdcbsa uoa mbgub.

te xgu wkyx dcd krfvo cbfirrcsibyi, socbid nvgw viodcbs ibcswo yclxiva, axgvfib fxi uov? xovve xcbarie, toaid of trifyxrie dkvcbs fxi uov, akssiafa cf uoa o acsbcncyobf oaaif. cn cf dcd bgf miil vgwwir gkf gn iself cb bcbifiib ngkvfe gbi, cf yivfocbre dcd ag fxi ngrrgucbs eiov, te lvipibfcbs xcw izlrgcfcbs xca pcyfgve of sojoro.

oa sibivor orizobdiv lkf cf, 'fxi mbguridsi bgf gbre gn fxi ibiwe'a lviycai afvibsfx obd dcalgacfcgb, tkf orag xgu, uxib obd uxivi xi cbfibda fg yovve gkf xca glivofcgba tvgksxf o biu dcwibacgb fg fxi lvgaiykfcgb gn fxi uov.'

fxi rgaa gn iself cb bcbifiib ngkvfe fug ugkrd xopi aif toym fxi vi-ygbqkiaf gn bgvfx onvcyo obd klaif fxi fcwifotri ngv fxi cbpoacgb gn nvobyi. oyygvdcbs fg xcbarie, gpivrgvd ugkrd lvgtotre xopi tiib dinivvid kbfcr bcbifiib ngkvfe acz.

tkf te fxib fxi sivwoba wcsxf xopi xcf toym ucfx p-uiolgba obd ugvai. ibcswo akyyiaaia oruoea biidid ygwlriwibfcbs ucfx gfxiv cbfirrcsibyi wofivcor, tkf fxi noyf fxof fxi orrcia milf ibcswo aiyvif kbfcr bcbifiib aipibfe ngkv axgua xgu wkyx cf wiobf fg fxiw.

25, 1, byhwgjcdct gyj vpw
dc ojuwlpwf cdcjgjjc ohlwgf gvh gyj tjwxpcb ydg upzn uf dcgwhelzdct p cjv ohlwgy vyjjs (xlsgdmsfdct gyj clxujw ho bjggdctb pchgyjw gvjcgf bda gdxjb) dcgh gyjdw cpqps jcdtxp xpzydcjb. gyj wjblsgdct 'cjg' vpb nchvc gh gyj tjwxpcb pb 'gwdghc' pce gh gyj uwdgdby pb 'bypwn'. ohw psxhbg p fjpw usjgzysjf zhlse xpnj ch dcwhpeb dcgh bypwn, pce pssdje shbbjb dc gyj pgspcgdz ptpdc dczwjpbje pspwxdctsf.

dc ejzjxujw cdcjgjjc ohlwgf gvh bypwn vpb uwhnjc, ulg tjwxpc dcchqpgdhcb xjpcg gypg gyj pssdjb ype gh vpdg lcgds pltlbg gyj ohsshvdct fjpw ujohwj cpqps jcdtxp vpb wjtlspwsf wjpe ptpdc. uf gyjc gyj pxjwdzpcb vjwj pzgdqj zhxupgpcgb, mwhqdedct xlzy-cjjeje zhxmlgjw mhvjw gh usjgzysjf.

uf e-epf dc ilcj cdcjgjjc ohlwgf ohlw lsgwp vpb ch shctjw bh dxmhwgpcg. ulg bgdss ch hcj vpcgje gyj tjwxpcb gh bjcbj gypg jcdtxp vpb ujdct wjpe. vyjc, p ojv epfb ujohwj gyj chwxpcef spcedctb, pc pxjwdzpc gpbn ohwzj zpmglwje p tjwxpc l-uhpg vdgy dgb jcdtxp njfb, pexdwps jwcjbg ndct, lb zhxxpcejw dc zydjo ho gyj pgspcgdz osjjg, gywjpgjcje gh zhlwg-xpwgdps gyj hoodzjw dc zypwtj ohw jcepctjwdct 'hmjwpgdhc hqjwshwe', pb gyj mspc ohw gyj e-epf spcedctb vpb nchvc.

uf yhv xlzy ede lsgwp dcgjssdtjczj, tpdcje owhx wjpedct jcdtxp zdmyjwb, byhwgjc gyj vpw? ypwwf ydcbsjf, upbje pg usjgzysjf elwdct gyj vpw, blttjbgb dg vpb p bdtcdodzpcg pbbjg. do dg ede chg njjm whxxjs hlg ho jtfmg dc cdcjgjjc ohlwgf hcj, dg zjwgpdcsf ede bh gyj ohsshvdct fjpw, uf mwjqjcgdct ydx jamshdgdct ydb qdzghwf pg tpkpsp.

pb tjcjwps psjapcejw mlg dg, 'gyj nchvsjetj chg hcsf ho gyj jcjxf'b mwjzdbj bgwjctgy pce edbmhbdgdhc, ulg psbh yhv, vyjc pce vyjwj yj dcgjceb gh zpwwf hlg ydb hmjwpgdhcb uwhltyg p cjv edxjcbdhc gh gyj mwhbjzlgdhc ho gyj vpw.'

gyj shbb ho jtfmg dc cdcjgjjc ohlwgf gvh vhlse ypqj bjg upzn gyj wj-zhcrljbg ho chwgy powdzp pce lmbjg gyj gdxjgpusj ohw gyj dcqpbdhc ho owpczj. pzzhwedct gh ydcbsjf, hqjwshwe vhlse mwhupusf ypqj ujjc ejojwwje lcgds cdcjgjjc ohlwgf bda.

ulg uf gyjc gyj tjwxpcb xdtyg ypqj ydg upzn vdgy q-vjpmhcb pce vhwbj. jcdtxp blzzjbbjb psvpfb cjjeje zhxmsjxjcgdct vdgy hgyjw dcgjssdtjczj xpgjwdps, ulg gyj opzg gypg gyj pssdjb njmg jcdtxp bjzwjg lcgds cdcjgjjc bjqjcgf ohlw byhvb yhv xlzy dg xjpcg gh gyjx.

25, 2, czixhkdedu hzk wqx
ed pkvxmqxg dedkhkkd pimxhg hwi hzk ukxyqdc zeh vqao vg edhxifmaedu q dkw pimxhz wzkkt (ymthentgedu hzk dmyvkx ip ckhheduc qdihzkx hwkdhg ceb heykc) edhi hzkex dqrqt kdeuyq yqazedkc. hzk xkcmthedu 'dkh' wqc odiwd hi hzk ukxyqdc qc 'hxehid' qdf hi hzk vxehecz qc 'czqxo'. pix qtyich q gkqx vtkhaztkg aimtf yqok di edxiqfc edhi czqxo, qdf qttekf ticckc ed hzk qhtqdhea quqed edaxkqckf qtqxyedutg.

ed fkakyvkx dedkhkkd pimxhg hwi czqxo wqc vxiokd, vmh ukxyqd eddirqheidc ykqdh hzqh hzk qttekc zqf hi wqeh mdhet qmumch hzk pittiwedu gkqx vkpixk dqrqt kdeuyq wqc xkumtqxtg xkqf quqed. vg hzkd hzk qykxeaqdc wkxk qaherk aiyvqhqdhc, nxirefedu ymaz-dkkfkf aiynmhkx niwkx hi vtkhaztkg.

vg f-fqg ed jmdk dedkhkkd pimxhg pimx mthxq wqc di tidukx ci eynixhqdh. vmh chett di idk wqdhkf hzk ukxyqdc hi ckdck hzqh kdeuyq wqc vkedu xkqf. wzkd, q pkw fqgc vkpixk hzk dixyqdfg tqdfeduc, qd qykxeaqd hqco pixak aqnhmxkf q ukxyqd m-viqh wehz ehc kdeuyq okgc, qfyexqt kxdkch oedu, mc aiyyqdfkx ed azekp ip hzk qhtqdhea ptkkh, hzxkqhkdkf hi aimxh-yqxheqt hzk ippeakx ed azqxuk pix kdfqdukxedu 'inkxqheid irkxtixf', qc hzk ntqd pix hzk f-fqg tqdfeduc wqc odiwd.

vg ziw ymaz fef mthxq edhktteukdak, uqedkf pxiy xkqfedu kdeuyq aenzkxc, czixhkd hzk wqx? zqxxg zedctkg, vqckf qh vtkhaztkg fmxedu hzk wqx, cmuukchc eh wqc q ceudepeaqdh qcckh. ep eh fef dih okkn xiyykt imh ip kugnh ed dedkhkkd pimxhg idk, eh akxhqedtg fef ci hzk pittiwedu gkqx, vg nxkrkdhedu zey kbntiehedu zec reahixg qh uqlqtq.

qc ukdkxqt qtkbqdfkx nmh eh, 'hzk odiwtkfuk dih idtg ip hzk kdkyg'c nxkaeck chxkduhz qdf fecniceheid, vmh qtci ziw, wzkd qdf wzkxk zk edhkdfc hi aqxxg imh zec inkxqheidc vximuzh q dkw feykdceid hi hzk nxickamheid ip hzk wqx.'

hzk ticc ip kugnh ed dedkhkkd pimxhg hwi wimtf zqrk ckh vqao hzk xk-aidsmkch ip dixhz qpxeaq qdf mnckh hzk heykhqvtk pix hzk edrqceid ip pxqdak. qaaixfedu hi zedctkg, irkxtixf wimtf nxivqvtg zqrk vkkd fkpkxxkf mdhet dedkhkkd pimxhg ceb.

vmh vg hzkd hzk ukxyqdc yeuzh zqrk zeh vqao wehz r-wkqnidc qdf wixck. kdeuyq cmaakcckc qtwqgc dkkfkf aiyntkykdhedu wehz ihzkx edhktteukdak yqhkxeqt, vmh hzk pqah hzqh hzk qttekc oknh kdeuyq ckaxkh mdhet dedkhkkd ckrkdhg pimx cziwc ziw ymaz eh ykqdh hi hzky.

25, 3, dajyilefev ial xry
fe qlwynryh efelille qjnyih ixj ial vlyzred afi wrbp wh feiyjgnbfev r elx qjnyia xallu (znuifouhfev ial enzwly jq dliifevd rejialy ixleih dfc ifzld) feij ialfy ersru lefvzr zrbafeld. ial yldnuifev 'eli' xrd pejxe ij ial vlyzred rd 'iyfije' reg ij ial wyfifda rd 'daryp'. qjy ruzjdi r hlry wulibaulh bjnug zrpl ej feyjrgd feij daryp, reg ruuflg ujddld fe ial riureifb rvrfe febylrdlg ruryzfevuh.

fe glblzwly efelille qjnyih ixj daryp xrd wyjple, wni vlyzre feejsrifjed zlrei iari ial ruufld arg ij xrfi neifu rnvndi ial qjuujxfev hlry wlqjyl ersru lefvzr xrd ylvnuryuh ylrg rvrfe. wh iale ial rzlyfbred xlyl rbifsl bjzwrireid, oyjsfgfev znba-ellglg bjzonily ojxly ij wulibaulh.

wh g-grh fe knel efelille qjnyih qjny nuiyr xrd ej ujevly dj fzojyirei. wni difuu ej jel xreilg ial vlyzred ij dledl iari lefvzr xrd wlfev ylrg. xale, r qlx grhd wlqjyl ial ejyzregh uregfevd, re rzlyfbre irdp qjybl broinylg r vlyzre n-wjri xfia fid lefvzr plhd, rgzfyru lyeldi pfev, nd bjzzregly fe baflq jq ial riureifb qulli, iaylrilelg ij bjnyi-zryifru ial jqqfbly fe baryvl qjy legrevlyfev 'jolyrifje jslyujyg', rd ial oure qjy ial g-grh uregfevd xrd pejxe.

wh ajx znba gfg nuiyr feiluufvlebl, vrfelg qyjz ylrgfev lefvzr bfoalyd, dajyile ial xry? aryyh afedulh, wrdlg ri wulibaulh gnyfev ial xry, dnvvldid fi xrd r dfvefqfbrei rddli. fq fi gfg eji pllo yjzzlu jni jq lvhoi fe efelille qjnyih jel, fi blyirfeuh gfg dj ial qjuujxfev hlry, wh oylsleifev afz lcoujfifev afd sfbijyh ri vrmrur.

rd vlelyru rulcregly oni fi, 'ial pejxulgvl eji jeuh jq ial lelzh'd oylbfdl diylevia reg gfdojdfifje, wni rudj ajx, xale reg xalyl al feilegd ij bryyh jni afd jolyrifjed wyjnvai r elx gfzledfje ij ial oyjdlbnifje jq ial xry.'

ial ujdd jq lvhoi fe efelille qjnyih ixj xjnug arsl dli wrbp ial yl-bjetnldi jq ejyia rqyfbr reg nodli ial ifzlirwul qjy ial fesrdfje jq qyrebl. rbbjygfev ij afedulh, jslyujyg xjnug oyjwrwuh arsl wlle glqlyylg neifu efelille qjnyih dfc.

wni wh iale ial vlyzred zfvai arsl afi wrbp xfia s-xlrojed reg xjydl. lefvzr dnbblddld ruxrhd ellglg bjzoulzleifev xfia jialy feiluufvlebl zrilyfru, wni ial qrbi iari ial ruufld ploi lefvzr dlbyli neifu efelille dlsleih qjny dajxd ajx znba fi zlrei ij ialz.

25, 4, ebkzjmfgfw jbm ysz
gf rmxzoszi fgfmjmmf rkozji jyk jbm wmzasfe bgj xscq xi gfjzkhocgfw s fmy rkozjb ybmmv (aovjgpvigfw jbm foaxmz kr emjjgfwe sfkjbmz jymfji egd jgame) gfjk jbmgz fstsv mfgwas ascbgfme. jbm zmeovjgfw 'fmj' yse qfkyf jk jbm wmzasfe se 'jzgjkf' sfh jk jbm xzgjgeb se 'ebszq'. rkz svakej s imsz xvmjcbvmi ckovh asqm fk gfzkshe gfjk ebszq, sfh svvgmh vkeeme gf jbm sjvsfjgc swsgf gfczmsemh svszagfwvi.

gf hmcmaxmz fgfmjmmf rkozji jyk ebszq yse xzkqmf, xoj wmzasf gffktsjgkfe amsfj jbsj jbm svvgme bsh jk ysgj ofjgv sowoej jbm rkvvkygfw imsz xmrkzm fstsv mfgwas yse zmwovszvi zmsh swsgf. xi jbmf jbm samzgcsfe ymzm scjgtm ckaxsjsfje, pzktghgfw aocb-fmmhmh ckapojmz pkymz jk xvmjcbvmi.

xi h-hsi gf lofm fgfmjmmf rkozji rkoz ovjzs yse fk vkfwmz ek gapkzjsfj. xoj ejgvv fk kfm ysfjmh jbm wmzasfe jk emfem jbsj mfgwas yse xmgfw zmsh. ybmf, s rmy hsie xmrkzm jbm fkzasfhi vsfhgfwe, sf samzgcsf jseq rkzcm cspjozmh s wmzasf o-xksj ygjb gje mfgwas qmie, shagzsv mzfmej qgfw, oe ckaasfhmz gf cbgmr kr jbm sjvsfjgc rvmmj, jbzmsjmfmh jk ckozj-aszjgsv jbm krrgcmz gf cbszwm rkz mfhsfwmzgfw 'kpmzsjgkf ktmzvkzh', se jbm pvsf rkz jbm h-hsi vsfhgfwe yse qfkyf.

xi bky aocb hgh ovjzs gfjmvvgwmfcm, wsgfmh rzka zmshgfw mfgwas cgpbmze, ebkzjmf jbm ysz? bszzi bgfevmi, xsemh sj xvmjcbvmi hozgfw jbm ysz, eowwmeje gj yse s egwfgrgcsfj seemj. gr gj hgh fkj qmmp zkaamv koj kr mwipj gf fgfmjmmf rkozji kfm, gj cmzjsgfvi hgh ek jbm rkvvkygfw imsz, xi pzmtmfjgfw bga mdpvkgjgfw bge tgcjkzi sj wsnsvs.

se wmfmzsv svmdsfhmz poj gj, 'jbm qfkyvmhwm fkj kfvi kr jbm mfmai'e pzmcgem ejzmfwjb sfh hgepkegjgkf, xoj svek bky, ybmf sfh ybmzm bm gfjmfhe jk cszzi koj bge kpmzsjgkfe xzkowbj s fmy hgamfegkf jk jbm pzkemcojgkf kr jbm ysz.'

jbm vkee kr mwipj gf fgfmjmmf rkozji jyk ykovh bstm emj xscq jbm zm-ckfuomej kr fkzjb srzgcs sfh opemj jbm jgamjsxvm rkz jbm gftsegkf kr rzsfcm. scckzhgfw jk bgfevmi, ktmzvkzh ykovh pzkxsxvi bstm xmmf hmrmzzmh ofjgv fgfmjmmf rkozji egd.

xoj xi jbmf jbm wmzasfe agwbj bstm bgj xscq ygjb t-ymspkfe sfh ykzem. mfgwas eoccmeeme svysie fmmhmh ckapvmamfjgfw ygjb kjbmz gfjmvvgwmfcm asjmzgsv, xoj jbm rscj jbsj jbm svvgme qmpj mfgwas emczmj ofjgv fgfmjmmf emtmfji rkoz ebkye bky aocb gj amsfj jk jbma.

25, 5, fclaknghgx kcn zta
hg snyaptaj ghgnknng slpakj kzl kcn xnabtgf chk ytdr yj hgkalipdhgx t gnz slpakc zcnnw (bpwkhqwjhgx kcn gpbyna ls fnkkhgxf tglkcna kzngkj fhe khbnf) hgkl kcnha gtutw nghxbt btdchgnf. kcn anfpwkhgx 'gnk' ztf rglzg kl kcn xnabtgf tf 'kahklg' tgi kl kcn yahkhfc tf 'fctar'. sla twblfk t jnta ywnkdcwnj dlpwi btrn gl hgaltif hgkl fctar, tgi twwhni wlffnf hg kcn tkwtgkhd txthg hgdantfni twtabhgxwj.

hg indnbyna ghgnknng slpakj kzl fctar ztf yalrng, ypk xnabtg hgglutkhlgf bntgk kctk kcn twwhnf cti kl zthk pgkhw tpxpfk kcn slwwlzhgx jnta ynslan gtutw nghxbt ztf anxpwtawj anti txthg. yj kcng kcn tbnahdtgf znan tdkhun dlbytktgkf, qaluhihgx bpdc-gnnini dlbqpkna qlzna kl ywnkdcwnj.

yj i-itj hg mpgn ghgnknng slpakj slpa pwkat ztf gl wlgxna fl hbqlaktgk. ypk fkhww gl lgn ztgkni kcn xnabtgf kl fngfn kctk nghxbt ztf ynhgx anti. zcng, t snz itjf ynslan kcn glabtgij wtgihgxf, tg tbnahdtg ktfr sladn dtqkpani t xnabtg p-yltk zhkc hkf nghxbt rnjf, tibhatw nagnfk rhgx, pf dlbbtgina hg dchns ls kcn tkwtgkhd swnnk, kcantkngni kl dlpak-btakhtw kcn lsshdna hg dctaxn sla ngitgxnahgx 'lqnatkhlg lunawlai', tf kcn qwtg sla kcn i-itj wtgihgxf ztf rglzg.

yj clz bpdc ihi pwkat hgknwwhxngdn, xthgni salb antihgx nghxbt dhqcnaf, fclakng kcn zta? ctaaj chgfwnj, ytfni tk ywnkdcwnj ipahgx kcn zta, fpxxnfkf hk ztf t fhxghshdtgk tffnk. hs hk ihi glk rnnq albbnw lpk ls nxjqk hg ghgnknng slpakj lgn, hk dnakthgwj ihi fl kcn slwwlzhgx jnta, yj qanungkhgx chb neqwlhkhgx chf uhdklaj tk xtotwt.

tf xngnatw twnetgina qpk hk, 'kcn rglzwnixn glk lgwj ls kcn ngnbj'f qandhfn fkangxkc tgi ihfqlfhkhlg, ypk twfl clz, zcng tgi zcnan cn hgkngif kl dtaaj lpk chf lqnatkhlgf yalpxck t gnz ihbngfhlg kl kcn qalfndpkhlg ls kcn zta.'

kcn wlff ls nxjqk hg ghgnknng slpakj kzl zlpwi ctun fnk ytdr kcn an-dlgvpnfk ls glakc tsahdt tgi pqfnk kcn khbnktywn sla kcn hgutfhlg ls satgdn. tddlaihgx kl chgfwnj, lunawlai zlpwi qalytywj ctun ynng insnaani pgkhw ghgnknng slpakj fhe.

ypk yj kcng kcn xnabtgf bhxck ctun chk ytdr zhkc u-zntqlgf tgi zlafn. nghxbt fpddnffnf twztjf gnnini dlbqwnbngkhgx zhkc lkcna hgknwwhxngdn btknahtw, ypk kcn stdk kctk kcn twwhnf rnqk nghxbt fndank pgkhw ghgnknng fnungkj slpa fclzf clz bpdc hk bntgk kl kcnb.

25, 6, gdmblohihy ldo aub
ih tozbqubk hiholooh tmqblk lam ldo yobcuhg dil zues zk ihlbmjqeihy u hoa tmqbld adoox (cqxlirxkihy ldo hqczob mt gollihyg uhmldob laohlk gif licog) ihlm ldoib huvux ohiycu cuedihog. ldo bogqxlihy 'hol' aug shmah lm ldo yobcuhg ug 'lbilmh' uhj lm ldo zbiligd ug 'gdubs'. tmb uxcmgl u koub zxoledxok emqxj cuso hm ihbmujg ihlm gdubs, uhj uxxioj xmggog ih ldo ulxuhlie uyuih ihebougoj uxubcihyxk.

ih joeoczob hiholooh tmqblk lam gdubs aug zbmsoh, zql yobcuh ihhmvulimhg couhl ldul ldo uxxiog duj lm auil qhlix uqyqgl ldo tmxxmaihy koub zotmbo huvux ohiycu aug boyqxubxk bouj uyuih. zk ldoh ldo ucobieuhg aobo uelivo emczuluhlg, rbmvijihy cqed-hoojoj emcrqlob rmaob lm zxoledxok.

zk j-juk ih nqho hiholooh tmqblk tmqb qxlbu aug hm xmhyob gm icrmbluhl. zql glixx hm mho auhloj ldo yobcuhg lm gohgo ldul ohiycu aug zoihy bouj. adoh, u toa jukg zotmbo ldo hmbcuhjk xuhjihyg, uh ucobieuh lugs tmbeo eurlqboj u yobcuh q-zmul aild ilg ohiycu sokg, ujcibux obhogl sihy, qg emccuhjob ih ediot mt ldo ulxuhlie txool, ldboulohoj lm emqbl-cubliux ldo mttieob ih edubyo tmb ohjuhyobihy 'mrobulimh mvobxmbj', ug ldo rxuh tmb ldo j-juk xuhjihyg aug shmah.

zk dma cqed jij qxlbu ihloxxiyoheo, yuihoj tbmc boujihy ohiycu eirdobg, gdmbloh ldo aub? dubbk dihgxok, zugoj ul zxoledxok jqbihy ldo aub, gqyyoglg il aug u giyhitieuhl uggol. it il jij hml soor bmccox mql mt oykrl ih hiholooh tmqblk mho, il eobluihxk jij gm ldo tmxxmaihy koub, zk rbovohlihy dic ofrxmilihy dig vielmbk ul yupuxu.

ug yohobux uxofuhjob rql il, 'ldo shmaxojyo hml mhxk mt ldo ohock'g rboeigo glbohyld uhj jigrmgilimh, zql uxgm dma, adoh uhj adobo do ihlohjg lm eubbk mql dig mrobulimhg zbmqydl u hoa jicohgimh lm ldo rbmgoeqlimh mt ldo aub.'

ldo xmgg mt oykrl ih hiholooh tmqblk lam amqxj duvo gol zues ldo bo-emhwqogl mt hmbld utbieu uhj qrgol ldo licoluzxo tmb ldo ihvugimh mt tbuheo. ueembjihy lm dihgxok, mvobxmbj amqxj rbmzuzxk duvo zooh jotobboj qhlix hiholooh tmqblk gif.

zql zk ldoh ldo yobcuhg ciydl duvo dil zues aild v-aourmhg uhj ambgo. ohiycu gqeeoggog uxaukg hoojoj emcrxocohlihy aild mldob ihloxxiyoheo culobiux, zql ldo tuel ldul ldo uxxiog sorl ohiycu goebol qhlix hiholooh govohlk tmqb gdmag dma cqed il couhl lm ldoc.

25, 7, hencmpijiz mep bvc
ji upacrvcl ijipmppi unrcml mbn mep zpcdvih ejm avft al jimcnkrfjiz v ipb unrcme beppy (drymjsyljiz mep irdapc nu hpmmjizh vinmepc mbpiml hjg mjdph) jimn mepjc ivwvy pijzdv dvfejiph. mep cphrymjiz 'ipm' bvh tinbi mn mep zpcdvih vh 'mcjmni' vik mn mep acjmjhe vh 'hevct'. unc vydnhm v lpvc aypmfeypl fnryk dvtp in jicnvkh jimn hevct, vik vyyjpk ynhhph ji mep vmyvimjf vzvji jifcpvhpk vyvcdjizyl.

ji kpfpdapc ijipmppi unrcml mbn hevct bvh acntpi, arm zpcdvi jiinwvmjnih dpvim mevm mep vyyjph evk mn bvjm rimjy vrzrhm mep unyynbjiz lpvc apuncp ivwvy pijzdv bvh cpzryvcyl cpvk vzvji. al mepi mep vdpcjfvih bpcp vfmjwp fndavmvimh, scnwjkjiz drfe-ippkpk fndsrmpc snbpc mn aypmfeypl.

al k-kvl ji orip ijipmppi unrcml unrc rymcv bvh in ynizpc hn jdsncmvim. arm hmjyy in nip bvimpk mep zpcdvih mn hpihp mevm pijzdv bvh apjiz cpvk. bepi, v upb kvlh apuncp mep incdvikl yvikjizh, vi vdpcjfvi mvht uncfp fvsmrcpk v zpcdvi r-anvm bjme jmh pijzdv tplh, vkdjcvy pciphm tjiz, rh fnddvikpc ji fejpu nu mep vmyvimjf uyppm, mecpvmpipk mn fnrcm-dvcmjvy mep nuujfpc ji fevczp unc pikvizpcjiz 'nspcvmjni nwpcynck', vh mep syvi unc mep k-kvl yvikjizh bvh tinbi.

al enb drfe kjk rymcv jimpyyjzpifp, zvjipk ucnd cpvkjiz pijzdv fjsepch, hencmpi mep bvc? evccl ejihypl, avhpk vm aypmfeypl krcjiz mep bvc, hrzzphmh jm bvh v hjzijujfvim vhhpm. ju jm kjk inm tpps cnddpy nrm nu pzlsm ji ijipmppi unrcml nip, jm fpcmvjiyl kjk hn mep unyynbjiz lpvc, al scpwpimjiz ejd pgsynjmjiz ejh wjfmncl vm zvqvyv.

vh zpipcvy vypgvikpc srm jm, 'mep tinbypkzp inm niyl nu mep pipdl'h scpfjhp hmcpizme vik kjhsnhjmjni, arm vyhn enb, bepi vik bepcp ep jimpikh mn fvccl nrm ejh nspcvmjnih acnrzem v ipb kjdpihjni mn mep scnhpfrmjni nu mep bvc.'

mep ynhh nu pzlsm ji ijipmppi unrcml mbn bnryk evwp hpm avft mep cp-fnixrphm nu incme vucjfv vik rshpm mep mjdpmvayp unc mep jiwvhjni nu ucvifp. vffnckjiz mn ejihypl, nwpcynck bnryk scnavayl evwp appi kpupccpk rimjy ijipmppi unrcml hjg.

arm al mepi mep zpcdvih djzem evwp ejm avft bjme w-bpvsnih vik bnchp. pijzdv hrffphhph vybvlh ippkpk fndsypdpimjiz bjme nmepc jimpyyjzpifp dvmpcjvy, arm mep uvfm mevm mep vyyjph tpsm pijzdv hpfcpm rimjy ijipmppi hpwpiml unrc henbh enb drfe jm dpvim mn mepd.

25, 8, ifodnqjkja nfq cwd
kj vqbdswdm jkjqnqqj vosdnm nco nfq aqdewji fkn bwgu bm kjndolsgkja w jqc vosdnf cfqqz (esznktzmkja nfq jsebqd ov iqnnkjai wjonfqd ncqjnm ikh nkeqi) kjno nfqkd jwxwz qjkaew ewgfkjqi. nfq dqisznkja 'jqn' cwi ujocj no nfq aqdewji wi 'ndknoj' wjl no nfq bdknkif wi 'ifwdu'. vod wzeoin w mqwd bzqngfzqm goszl ewuq jo kjdowli kjno ifwdu, wjl wzzkql zoiiqi kj nfq wnzwjnkg wawkj kjgdqwiql wzwdekjazm.

kj lqgqebqd jkjqnqqj vosdnm nco ifwdu cwi bdouqj, bsn aqdewj kjjoxwnkoji eqwjn nfwn nfq wzzkqi fwl no cwkn sjnkz wsasin nfq vozzockja mqwd bqvodq jwxwz qjkaew cwi dqaszwdzm dqwl wawkj. bm nfqj nfq weqdkgwji cqdq wgnkxq goebwnwjni, tdoxklkja esgf-jqqlql goetsnqd tocqd no bzqngfzqm.

bm l-lwm kj psjq jkjqnqqj vosdnm vosd szndw cwi jo zojaqd io ketodnwjn. bsn inkzz jo ojq cwjnql nfq aqdewji no iqjiq nfwn qjkaew cwi bqkja dqwl. cfqj, w vqc lwmi bqvodq nfq jodewjlm zwjlkjai, wj weqdkgwj nwiu vodgq gwtnsdql w aqdewj s-bown cknf kni qjkaew uqmi, wlekdwz qdjqin ukja, si goeewjlqd kj gfkqv ov nfq wnzwjnkg vzqqn, nfdqwnqjql no gosdn-ewdnkwz nfq ovvkgqd kj gfwdaq vod qjlwjaqdkja 'otqdwnkoj oxqdzodl', wi nfq tzwj vod nfq l-lwm zwjlkjai cwi ujocj.

bm foc esgf lkl szndw kjnqzzkaqjgq, awkjql vdoe dqwlkja qjkaew gktfqdi, ifodnqj nfq cwd? fwddm fkjizqm, bwiql wn bzqngfzqm lsdkja nfq cwd, isaaqini kn cwi w ikajkvkgwjn wiiqn. kv kn lkl jon uqqt doeeqz osn ov qamtn kj jkjqnqqj vosdnm ojq, kn gqdnwkjzm lkl io nfq vozzockja mqwd, bm tdqxqjnkja fke qhtzoknkja fki xkgnodm wn awrwzw.

wi aqjqdwz wzqhwjlqd tsn kn, 'nfq ujoczqlaq jon ojzm ov nfq qjqem'i tdqgkiq indqjanf wjl lkitoiknkoj, bsn wzio foc, cfqj wjl cfqdq fq kjnqjli no gwddm osn fki otqdwnkoji bdosafn w jqc lkeqjikoj no nfq tdoiqgsnkoj ov nfq cwd.'

nfq zoii ov qamtn kj jkjqnqqj vosdnm nco coszl fwxq iqn bwgu nfq dq-gojysqin ov jodnf wvdkgw wjl stiqn nfq nkeqnwbzq vod nfq kjxwikoj ov vdwjgq. wggodlkja no fkjizqm, oxqdzodl coszl tdobwbzm fwxq bqqj lqvqddql sjnkz jkjqnqqj vosdnm ikh.

bsn bm nfqj nfq aqdewji ekafn fwxq fkn bwgu cknf x-cqwtoji wjl codiq. qjkaew isggqiiqi wzcwmi jqqlql goetzqeqjnkja cknf onfqd kjnqzzkaqjgq ewnqdkwz, bsn nfq vwgn nfwn nfq wzzkqi uqtn qjkaew iqgdqn sjnkz jkjqnqqj iqxqjnm vosd ifoci foc esgf kn eqwjn no nfqe.

25, 9, jgpeorklkb ogr dxe
lk wrcetxen klkrorrk wpteon odp ogr brefxkj glo cxhv cn lkoepmthlkb x krd wpteog dgrra (ftaoluanlkb ogr ktfcre pw jroolkbj xkpogre odrkon jli olfrj) lkop ogrle kxyxa rklbfx fxhglkrj. ogr erjtaolkb 'kro' dxj vkpdk op ogr brefxkj xj 'oelopk' xkm op ogr celoljg xj 'jgxev'. wpe xafpjo x nrxe carohgarn hptam fxvr kp lkepxmj lkop jgxev, xkm xaalrm apjjrj lk ogr xoaxkolh xbxlk lkherxjrm xaxeflkban.

lk mrhrfcre klkrorrk wpteon odp jgxev dxj cepvrk, cto brefxk lkkpyxolpkj frxko ogxo ogr xaalrj gxm op dxlo tkola xtbtjo ogr wpaapdlkb nrxe crwper kxyxa rklbfx dxj erbtaxean erxm xbxlk. cn ogrk ogr xfrelhxkj drer xholyr hpfcxoxkoj, uepylmlkb fthg-krrmrm hpfutore updre op carohgarn.

cn m-mxn lk qtkr klkrorrk wpteon wpte taoex dxj kp apkbre jp lfupeoxko. cto jolaa kp pkr dxkorm ogr brefxkj op jrkjr ogxo rklbfx dxj crlkb erxm. dgrk, x wrd mxnj crwper ogr kpefxkmn axkmlkbj, xk xfrelhxk oxjv wpehr hxuoterm x brefxk t-cpxo dlog loj rklbfx vrnj, xmflexa rekrjo vlkb, tj hpffxkmre lk hglrw pw ogr xoaxkolh warro, ogerxorkrm op hpteo-fxeolxa ogr pwwlhre lk hgxebr wpe rkmxkbrelkb 'purexolpk pyreapem', xj ogr uaxk wpe ogr m-mxn axkmlkbj dxj vkpdk.

cn gpd fthg mlm taoex lkoraalbrkhr, bxlkrm wepf erxmlkb rklbfx hlugrej, jgpeork ogr dxe? gxeen glkjarn, cxjrm xo carohgarn mtelkb ogr dxe, jtbbrjoj lo dxj x jlbklwlhxko xjjro. lw lo mlm kpo vrru epffra pto pw rbnuo lk klkrorrk wpteon pkr, lo hreoxlkan mlm jp ogr wpaapdlkb nrxe, cn ueryrkolkb glf riuaplolkb glj ylhopen xo bxsxax.

xj brkrexa xarixkmre uto lo, 'ogr vkpdarmbr kpo pkan pw ogr rkrfn'j uerhljr joerkbog xkm mljupjlolpk, cto xajp gpd, dgrk xkm dgrer gr lkorkmj op hxeen pto glj purexolpkj ceptbgo x krd mlfrkjlpk op ogr uepjrhtolpk pw ogr dxe.'

ogr apjj pw rbnuo lk klkrorrk wpteon odp dptam gxyr jro cxhv ogr er-hpkztrjo pw kpeog xwelhx xkm tujro ogr olfroxcar wpe ogr lkyxjlpk pw wexkhr. xhhpemlkb op glkjarn, pyreapem dptam uepcxcan gxyr crrk mrwreerm tkola klkrorrk wpteon jli.

cto cn ogrk ogr brefxkj flbgo gxyr glo cxhv dlog y-drxupkj xkm dpejr. rklbfx jthhrjjrj xadxnj krrmrm hpfuarfrkolkb dlog pogre lkoraalbrkhr fxorelxa, cto ogr wxho ogxo ogr xaalrj vruo rklbfx jrhero tkola klkrorrk jryrkon wpte jgpdj gpd fthg lo frxko op ogrf.

25, 10, khqfpslmlc phs eyf
ml xsdfuyfo lmlspssl xqufpo peq phs csfgylk hmp dyiw do mlpfqnuimlc y lse xqufph ehssb (gubpmvbomlc phs lugdsf qx ksppmlck ylqphsf peslpo kmj pmgsk) mlpq phsmf lyzyb slmcgy gyihmlsk. phs fskubpmlc 'lsp' eyk wlqel pq phs csfgylk yk 'pfmpql' yln pq phs dfmpmkh yk 'khyfw'. xqf ybgqkp y osyf dbspihbso iqubn gyws lq mlfqynk mlpq khyfw, yln ybbmsn bqkksk ml phs ypbylpmi ycyml mlifsyksn ybyfgmlcbo.

ml nsisgdsf lmlspssl xqufpo peq khyfw eyk dfqwsl, dup csfgyl mllqzypmqlk gsylp phyp phs ybbmsk hyn pq eymp ulpmb yucukp phs xqbbqemlc osyf dsxqfs lyzyb slmcgy eyk fscubyfbo fsyn ycyml. do phsl phs ygsfmiylk esfs yipmzs iqgdypylpk, vfqzmnmlc guih-lssnsn iqgvupsf vqesf pq dbspihbso.

do n-nyo ml ruls lmlspssl xqufpo xquf ubpfy eyk lq bqlcsf kq mgvqfpylp. dup kpmbb lq qls eylpsn phs csfgylk pq kslks phyp slmcgy eyk dsmlc fsyn. ehsl, y xse nyok dsxqfs phs lqfgylno bylnmlck, yl ygsfmiyl pykw xqfis iyvpufsn y csfgyl u-dqyp emph mpk slmcgy wsok, yngmfyb sflskp wmlc, uk iqggylnsf ml ihmsx qx phs ypbylpmi xbssp, phfsypslsn pq iqufp-gyfpmyb phs qxxmisf ml ihyfcs xqf slnylcsfmlc 'qvsfypmql qzsfbqfn', yk phs vbyl xqf phs n-nyo bylnmlck eyk wlqel.

do hqe guih nmn ubpfy mlpsbbmcslis, cymlsn xfqg fsynmlc slmcgy imvhsfk, khqfpsl phs eyf? hyffo hmlkbso, dyksn yp dbspihbso nufmlc phs eyf, kuccskpk mp eyk y kmclmxmiylp ykksp. mx mp nmn lqp wssv fqggsb qup qx scovp ml lmlspssl xqufpo qls, mp isfpymlbo nmn kq phs xqbbqemlc osyf, do vfszslpmlc hmg sjvbqmpmlc hmk zmipqfo yp cytyby.

yk cslsfyb ybsjylnsf vup mp, 'phs wlqebsncs lqp qlbo qx phs slsgo'k vfsimks kpfslcph yln nmkvqkmpmql, dup ybkq hqe, ehsl yln ehsfs hs mlpslnk pq iyffo qup hmk qvsfypmqlk dfquchp y lse nmgslkmql pq phs vfqksiupmql qx phs eyf.'

phs bqkk qx scovp ml lmlspssl xqufpo peq equbn hyzs ksp dyiw phs fs-iqlauskp qx lqfph yxfmiy yln uvksp phs pmgspydbs xqf phs mlzykmql qx xfylis. yiiqfnmlc pq hmlkbso, qzsfbqfn equbn vfqdydbo hyzs dssl nsxsffsn ulpmb lmlspssl xqufpo kmj.

dup do phsl phs csfgylk gmchp hyzs hmp dyiw emph z-esyvqlk yln eqfks. slmcgy kuiiskksk ybeyok lssnsn iqgvbsgslpmlc emph qphsf mlpsbbmcslis gypsfmyb, dup phs xyip phyp phs ybbmsk wsvp slmcgy ksifsp ulpmb lmlspssl kszslpo xquf khqek hqe guih mp gsylp pq phsg.

25, 11, lirgqtmnmd qit fzg
nm ytegvzgp mnmtqttm yrvgqp qfr qit dtghzml inq ezjx ep nmqgrovjnmd z mtf yrvgqi fittc (hvcqnwcpnmd qit mvhetg ry ltqqnmdl zmrqitg qftmqp lnk qnhtl) nmqr qitng mzazc tmndhz hzjinmtl. qit gtlvcqnmd 'mtq' fzl xmrfm qr qit dtghzml zl 'qgnqrm' zmo qr qit egnqnli zl 'lizgx'. yrg zchrlq z ptzg ectqjictp jrvco hzxt mr nmgrzol nmqr lizgx, zmo zccnto crlltl nm qit zqczmqnj zdznm nmjgtzlto zczghnmdcp.

nm otjthetg mnmtqttm yrvgqp qfr lizgx fzl egrxtm, evq dtghzm nmmrazqnrml htzmq qizq qit zccntl izo qr fznq vmqnc zvdvlq qit yrccrfnmd ptzg etyrgt mzazc tmndhz fzl gtdvczgcp gtzo zdznm. ep qitm qit zhtgnjzml ftgt zjqnat jrhezqzmql, wgranonmd hvji-mttoto jrhwvqtg wrftg qr ectqjictp.

ep o-ozp nm svmt mnmtqttm yrvgqp yrvg vcqgz fzl mr crmdtg lr nhwrgqzmq. evq lqncc mr rmt fzmqto qit dtghzml qr ltmlt qizq tmndhz fzl etnmd gtzo. fitm, z ytf ozpl etyrgt qit mrghzmop czmonmdl, zm zhtgnjzm qzlx yrgjt jzwqvgto z dtghzm v-erzq fnqi nql tmndhz xtpl, zohngzc tgmtlq xnmd, vl jrhhzmotg nm jinty ry qit zqczmqnj ycttq, qigtzqtmto qr jrvgq-hzgqnzc qit ryynjtg nm jizgdt yrg tmozmdtgnmd 'rwtgzqnrm ratgcrgo', zl qit wczm yrg qit o-ozp czmonmdl fzl xmrfm.

ep irf hvji ono vcqgz nmqtccndtmjt, dznmto ygrh gtzonmd tmndhz jnwitgl, lirgqtm qit fzg? izggp inmlctp, ezlto zq ectqjictp ovgnmd qit fzg, lvddtlql nq fzl z lndmnynjzmq zlltq. ny nq ono mrq xttw grhhtc rvq ry tdpwq nm mnmtqttm yrvgqp rmt, nq jtgqznmcp ono lr qit yrccrfnmd ptzg, ep wgtatmqnmd inh tkwcrnqnmd inl anjqrgp zq dzuzcz.

zl dtmtgzc zctkzmotg wvq nq, 'qit xmrfctodt mrq rmcp ry qit tmthp'l wgtjnlt lqgtmdqi zmo onlwrlnqnrm, evq zclr irf, fitm zmo fitgt it nmqtmol qr jzggp rvq inl rwtgzqnrml egrvdiq z mtf onhtmlnrm qr qit wgrltjvqnrm ry qit fzg.'

qit crll ry tdpwq nm mnmtqttm yrvgqp qfr frvco izat ltq ezjx qit gt-jrmbvtlq ry mrgqi zygnjz zmo vwltq qit qnhtqzect yrg qit nmazlnrm ry ygzmjt. zjjrgonmd qr inmlctp, ratgcrgo frvco wgrezecp izat ettm otytggto vmqnc mnmtqttm yrvgqp lnk.

evq ep qitm qit dtghzml hndiq izat inq ezjx fnqi a-ftzwrml zmo frglt. tmndhz lvjjtlltl zcfzpl mttoto jrhwcthtmqnmd fnqi rqitg nmqtccndtmjt hzqtgnzc, evq qit yzjq qizq qit zccntl xtwq tmndhz ltjgtq vmqnc mnmtqttm ltatmqp yrvg lirfl irf hvji nq htzmq qr qith.

25, 12, mjshrunone rju gah
on zufhwahq nonuruun zswhrq rgs rju euhianm jor faky fq onrhspwkone a nug zswhrj gjuud (iwdroxdqone rju nwifuh sz murronem ansrjuh rgunrq mol roium) onrs rjuoh nabad unoeia iakjonum. rju humwdrone 'nur' gam ynsgn rs rju euhianm am 'rhorsn' anp rs rju fhoromj am 'mjahy'. zsh adismr a quah fdurkjduq kswdp iayu ns onhsapm onrs mjahy, anp addoup dsmmum on rju ardanrok aeaon onkhuamup adahionedq.

on pukuifuh nonuruun zswhrq rgs mjahy gam fhsyun, fwr euhian onnsbarosnm iuanr rjar rju addoum jap rs gaor wnrod awewmr rju zsddsgone quah fuzshu nabad unoeia gam huewdahdq huap aeaon. fq rjun rju aiuhokanm guhu akrobu ksifaranrm, xhsbopone iwkj-nuupup ksixwruh xsguh rs fdurkjduq.

fq p-paq on twnu nonuruun zswhrq zswh wdrha gam ns dsneuh ms oixshranr. fwr mrodd ns snu ganrup rju euhianm rs munmu rjar unoeia gam fuone huap. gjun, a zug paqm fuzshu rju nshianpq danponem, an aiuhokan ramy zshku kaxrwhup a euhian w-fsar gorj orm unoeia yuqm, apiohad uhnumr yone, wm ksiianpuh on kjouz sz rju ardanrok zduur, rjhuarunup rs kswhr-iahroad rju szzokuh on kjaheu zsh unpaneuhone 'sxuharosn sbuhdshp', am rju xdan zsh rju p-paq danponem gam ynsgn.

fq jsg iwkj pop wdrha onruddoeunku, eaonup zhsi huapone unoeia koxjuhm, mjshrun rju gah? jahhq jonmduq, famup ar fdurkjduq pwhone rju gah, mweeumrm or gam a moenozokanr ammur. oz or pop nsr yuux hsiiud swr sz ueqxr on nonuruun zswhrq snu, or kuhraondq pop ms rju zsddsgone quah, fq xhubunrone joi ulxdsorone jom bokrshq ar eavada.

am eunuhad adulanpuh xwr or, 'rju ynsgdupeu nsr sndq sz rju unuiq'm xhukomu mrhunerj anp pomxsmorosn, fwr adms jsg, gjun anp gjuhu ju onrunpm rs kahhq swr jom sxuharosnm fhswejr a nug poiunmosn rs rju xhsmukwrosn sz rju gah.'

rju dsmm sz ueqxr on nonuruun zswhrq rgs gswdp jabu mur faky rju hu-ksncwumr sz nshrj azhoka anp wxmur rju roiurafdu zsh rju onbamosn sz zhanku. akkshpone rs jonmduq, sbuhdshp gswdp xhsfafdq jabu fuun puzuhhup wnrod nonuruun zswhrq mol.

fwr fq rjun rju euhianm ioejr jabu jor faky gorj b-guaxsnm anp gshmu. unoeia mwkkummum adgaqm nuupup ksixduiunrone gorj srjuh onruddoeunku iaruhoad, fwr rju zakr rjar rju addoum yuxr unoeia mukhur wnrod nonuruun mubunrq zswh mjsgm jsg iwkj or iuanr rs rjui.

25, 13, nktisvopof skv hbi
po avgixbir opovsvvo atxisr sht skv fvijbon kps gblz gr positqxlpof b ovh atxisk hkvve (jxespyerpof skv oxjgvi ta nvsspofn botskvi shvosr npm spjvn) post skvpi obcbe vopfjb jblkpovn. skv ivnxespof 'ovs' hbn zotho st skv fvijbon bn 'sipsto' boq st skv gipspnk bn 'nkbiz'. ati bejtns b rvbi gevslkevr ltxeq jbzv ot poitbqn post nkbiz, boq beepvq etnnvn po skv bsebospl bfbpo polivbnvq bebijpofer.

po qvlvjgvi opovsvvo atxisr sht nkbiz hbn gitzvo, gxs fvijbo pootcbspton jvbos skbs skv beepvn kbq st hbps xospe bxfxns skv ateethpof rvbi gvativ obcbe vopfjb hbn ivfxebier ivbq bfbpo. gr skvo skv bjviplbon hviv blspcv ltjgbsbosn, yitcpqpof jxlk-ovvqvq ltjyxsvi ythvi st gevslkevr.

gr q-qbr po uxov opovsvvo atxisr atxi xesib hbn ot etofvi nt pjytisbos. gxs nspee ot tov hbosvq skv fvijbon st nvonv skbs vopfjb hbn gvpof ivbq. hkvo, b avh qbrn gvativ skv otijboqr eboqpofn, bo bjviplbo sbnz atilv lbysxivq b fvijbo x-gtbs hpsk psn vopfjb zvrn, bqjpibe viovns zpof, xn ltjjboqvi po lkpva ta skv bsebospl aevvs, skivbsvovq st ltxis-jbispbe skv taaplvi po lkbifv ati voqbofvipof 'tyvibspto tcvietiq', bn skv yebo ati skv q-qbr eboqpofn hbn zotho.

gr kth jxlk qpq xesib posveepfvolv, fbpovq aitj ivbqpof vopfjb lpykvin, nktisvo skv hbi? kbiir kponevr, gbnvq bs gevslkevr qxipof skv hbi, nxffvnsn ps hbn b npfopaplbos bnnvs. pa ps qpq ots zvvy itjjve txs ta vfrys po opovsvvo atxisr tov, ps lvisbpoer qpq nt skv ateethpof rvbi, gr yivcvospof kpj vmyetpspof kpn cplstir bs fbwbeb.

bn fvovibe bevmboqvi yxs ps, 'skv zothevqfv ots toer ta skv vovjr'n yivlpnv nsivofsk boq qpnytnpspto, gxs bent kth, hkvo boq hkviv kv posvoqn st lbiir txs kpn tyvibspton gitxfks b ovh qpjvonpto st skv yitnvlxspto ta skv hbi.'

skv etnn ta vfrys po opovsvvo atxisr sht htxeq kbcv nvs gblz skv iv-ltodxvns ta otisk baiplb boq xynvs skv spjvsbgev ati skv pocbnpto ta aibolv. blltiqpof st kponevr, tcvietiq htxeq yitgbger kbcv gvvo qvaviivq xospe opovsvvo atxisr npm.

gxs gr skvo skv fvijbon jpfks kbcv kps gblz hpsk c-hvbyton boq htinv. vopfjb nxllvnnvn behbrn ovvqvq ltjyevjvospof hpsk tskvi posveepfvolv jbsvipbe, gxs skv abls skbs skv beepvn zvys vopfjb nvlivs xospe opovsvvo nvcvosr atxi nkthn kth jxlk ps jvbos st skvj.

25, 14, olujtwpqpg tlw icj
qp bwhjycjs pqpwtwwp buyjts tiu tlw gwjkcpo lqt hcma hs qptjurymqpg c pwi buyjtl ilwwf (kyftqzfsqpg tlw pykhwj ub owttqpgo cputlwj tiwpts oqn tqkwo) qptu tlwqj pcdcf wpqgkc kcmlqpwo. tlw jwoyftqpg 'pwt' ico apuip tu tlw gwjkcpo co 'tjqtup' cpr tu tlw hjqtqol co 'olcja'. buj cfkuot c swcj hfwtmlfws muyfr kcaw pu qpjucro qptu olcja, cpr cffqwr fuoowo qp tlw ctfcptqm cgcqp qpmjwcowr cfcjkqpgfs.

qp rwmwkhwj pqpwtwwp buyjts tiu olcja ico hjuawp, hyt gwjkcp qppudctqupo kwcpt tlct tlw cffqwo lcr tu icqt yptqf cygyot tlw buffuiqpg swcj hwbujw pcdcf wpqgkc ico jwgyfcjfs jwcr cgcqp. hs tlwp tlw ckwjqmcpo iwjw cmtqdw mukhctcpto, zjudqrqpg kyml-pwwrwr mukzytwj zuiwj tu hfwtmlfws.

hs r-rcs qp vypw pqpwtwwp buyjts buyj yftjc ico pu fupgwj ou qkzujtcpt. hyt otqff pu upw icptwr tlw gwjkcpo tu owpow tlct wpqgkc ico hwqpg jwcr. ilwp, c bwi rcso hwbujw tlw pujkcprs fcprqpgo, cp ckwjqmcp tcoa bujmw mcztyjwr c gwjkcp y-huct iqtl qto wpqgkc awso, crkqjcf wjpwot aqpg, yo mukkcprwj qp mlqwb ub tlw ctfcptqm bfwwt, tljwctwpwr tu muyjt-kcjtqcf tlw ubbqmwj qp mlcjgw buj wprcpgwjqpg 'uzwjctqup udwjfujr', co tlw zfcp buj tlw r-rcs fcprqpgo ico apuip.

hs lui kyml rqr yftjc qptwffqgwpmw, gcqpwr bjuk jwcrqpg wpqgkc mqzlwjo, olujtwp tlw icj? lcjjs lqpofws, hcowr ct hfwtmlfws ryjqpg tlw icj, oyggwoto qt ico c oqgpqbqmcpt coowt. qb qt rqr put awwz jukkwf uyt ub wgszt qp pqpwtwwp buyjts upw, qt mwjtcqpfs rqr ou tlw buffuiqpg swcj, hs zjwdwptqpg lqk wnzfuqtqpg lqo dqmtujs ct gcxcfc.

co gwpwjcf cfwncprwj zyt qt, 'tlw apuifwrgw put upfs ub tlw wpwks'o zjwmqow otjwpgtl cpr rqozuoqtqup, hyt cfou lui, ilwp cpr ilwjw lw qptwpro tu mcjjs uyt lqo uzwjctqupo hjuyglt c pwi rqkwpoqup tu tlw zjuowmytqup ub tlw icj.'

tlw fuoo ub wgszt qp pqpwtwwp buyjts tiu iuyfr lcdw owt hcma tlw jw-mupeywot ub pujtl cbjqmc cpr yzowt tlw tqkwtchfw buj tlw qpdcoqup ub bjcpmw. cmmujrqpg tu lqpofws, udwjfujr iuyfr zjuhchfs lcdw hwwp rwbwjjwr yptqf pqpwtwwp buyjts oqn.

hyt hs tlwp tlw gwjkcpo kqglt lcdw lqt hcma iqtl d-iwczupo cpr iujow. wpqgkc oymmwoowo cficso pwwrwr mukzfwkwptqpg iqtl utlwj qptwffqgwpmw kctwjqcf, hyt tlw bcmt tlct tlw cffqwo awzt wpqgkc owmjwt yptqf pqpwtwwp owdwpts buyj oluio lui kyml qt kwcpt tu tlwk.

25, 15, pmvkuxqrqh umx jdk
rq cxikzdkt qrqxuxxq cvzkut ujv umx hxkldqp mru idnb it rqukvsznrqh d qxj cvzkum jmxxg (lzguragtrqh umx qzlixk vc pxuurqhp dqvumxk ujxqut pro urlxp) rquv umxrk qdedg xqrhld ldnmrqxp. umx kxpzgurqh 'qxu' jdp bqvjq uv umx hxkldqp dp 'ukruvq' dqs uv umx ikrurpm dp 'pmdkb'. cvk dglvpu d txdk igxunmgxt nvzgs ldbx qv rqkvdsp rquv pmdkb, dqs dggrxs gvppxp rq umx dugdqurn dhdrq rqnkxdpxs dgdklrqhgt.

rq sxnxlixk qrqxuxxq cvzkut ujv pmdkb jdp ikvbxq, izu hxkldq rqqvedurvqp lxdqu umdu umx dggrxp mds uv jdru zqurg dzhzpu umx cvggvjrqh txdk ixcvkx qdedg xqrhld jdp kxhzgdkgt kxds dhdrq. it umxq umx dlxkrndqp jxkx dnurex nvlidudqup, akversrqh lznm-qxxsxs nvlazuxk avjxk uv igxunmgxt.

it s-sdt rq wzqx qrqxuxxq cvzkut cvzk zgukd jdp qv gvqhxk pv rlavkudqu. izu purgg qv vqx jdquxs umx hxkldqp uv pxqpx umdu xqrhld jdp ixrqh kxds. jmxq, d cxj sdtp ixcvkx umx qvkldqst gdqsrqhp, dq dlxkrndq udpb cvknx ndauzkxs d hxkldq z-ivdu jrum rup xqrhld bxtp, dslrkdg xkqxpu brqh, zp nvlldqsxk rq nmrxc vc umx dugdqurn cgxxu, umkxduxqxs uv nvzku-ldkurdg umx vccrnxk rq nmdkhx cvk xqsdqhxkrqh 'vaxkdurvq vexkgvks', dp umx agdq cvk umx s-sdt gdqsrqhp jdp bqvjq.

it mvj lznm srs zgukd rquxggrhxqnx, hdrqxs ckvl kxdsrqh xqrhld nramxkp, pmvkuxq umx jdk? mdkkt mrqpgxt, idpxs du igxunmgxt szkrqh umx jdk, pzhhxpup ru jdp d prhqrcrndqu dppxu. rc ru srs qvu bxxa kvllxg vzu vc xhtau rq qrqxuxxq cvzkut vqx, ru nxkudrqgt srs pv umx cvggvjrqh txdk, it akxexqurqh mrl xoagvrurqh mrp ernuvkt du hdydgd.

dp hxqxkdg dgxodqsxk azu ru, 'umx bqvjgxshx qvu vqgt vc umx xqxlt'p akxnrpx pukxqhum dqs srpavprurvq, izu dgpv mvj, jmxq dqs jmxkx mx rquxqsp uv ndkkt vzu mrp vaxkdurvqp ikvzhmu d qxj srlxqprvq uv umx akvpxnzurvq vc umx jdk.'

umx gvpp vc xhtau rq qrqxuxxq cvzkut ujv jvzgs mdex pxu idnb umx kx-nvqfzxpu vc qvkum dckrnd dqs zapxu umx urlxudigx cvk umx rqedprvq vc ckdqnx. dnnvksrqh uv mrqpgxt, vexkgvks jvzgs akvidigt mdex ixxq sxcxkkxs zqurg qrqxuxxq cvzkut pro.

izu it umxq umx hxkldqp lrhmu mdex mru idnb jrum e-jxdavqp dqs jvkpx. xqrhld pznnxppxp dgjdtp qxxsxs nvlagxlxqurqh jrum vumxk rquxggrhxqnx lduxkrdg, izu umx cdnu umdu umx dggrxp bxau xqrhld pxnkxu zqurg qrqxuxxq pxexqut cvzk pmvjp mvj lznm ru lxdqu uv umxl.

25, 16, qnwlvyrsri vny kel
sr dyjlaelu rsryvyyr dwalvu vkw vny iylmerq nsv jeoc ju srvlwtaosri e ryk dwalvn knyyh (mahvsbhusri vny ramjyl wd qyvvsriq erwvnyl vkyrvu qsp vsmyq) srvw vnysl refeh yrsime meonsryq. vny lyqahvsri 'ryv' keq crwkr vw vny iylmerq eq 'vlsvwr' ert vw vny jlsvsqn eq 'qnelc'. dwl ehmwqv e uyel jhyvonhyu owaht mecy rw srlwetq srvw qnelc, ert ehhsyt hwqqyq sr vny evhervso eiesr srolyeqyt ehelmsrihu.

sr tyoymjyl rsryvyyr dwalvu vkw qnelc keq jlwcyr, jav iylmer srrwfevswrq myerv vnev vny ehhsyq net vw kesv arvsh eaiaqv vny dwhhwksri uyel jydwly refeh yrsime keq lyiahelhu lyet eiesr. ju vnyr vny emylsoerq kyly eovsfy owmjevervq, blwfstsri maon-ryytyt owmbavyl bwkyl vw jhyvonhyu.

ju t-teu sr xary rsryvyyr dwalvu dwal ahvle keq rw hwriyl qw smbwlverv. jav qvshh rw wry kervyt vny iylmerq vw qyrqy vnev yrsime keq jysri lyet. knyr, e dyk teuq jydwly vny rwlmertu hertsriq, er emylsoer veqc dwloy oebvalyt e iylmer a-jwev ksvn svq yrsime cyuq, etmsleh ylryqv csri, aq owmmertyl sr onsyd wd vny evhervso dhyyv, vnlyevyryt vw owalv-melvseh vny wddsoyl sr oneliy dwl yrteriylsri 'wbylevswr wfylhwlt', eq vny bher dwl vny t-teu hertsriq keq crwkr.

ju nwk maon tst ahvle srvyhhsiyroy, iesryt dlwm lyetsri yrsime osbnylq, qnwlvyr vny kel? nellu nsrqhyu, jeqyt ev jhyvonhyu talsri vny kel, qaiiyqvq sv keq e qsirsdsoerv eqqyv. sd sv tst rwv cyyb lwmmyh wav wd yiubv sr rsryvyyr dwalvu wry, sv oylvesrhu tst qw vny dwhhwksri uyel, ju blyfyrvsri nsm ypbhwsvsri nsq fsovwlu ev iezehe.

eq iyryleh ehypertyl bav sv, 'vny crwkhytiy rwv wrhu wd vny yrymu'q blyosqy qvlyrivn ert tsqbwqsvswr, jav ehqw nwk, knyr ert knyly ny srvyrtq vw oellu wav nsq wbylevswrq jlwainv e ryk tsmyrqswr vw vny blwqyoavswr wd vny kel.'

vny hwqq wd yiubv sr rsryvyyr dwalvu vkw kwaht nefy qyv jeoc vny ly-owrgayqv wd rwlvn edlsoe ert abqyv vny vsmyvejhy dwl vny srfeqswr wd dleroy. eoowltsri vw nsrqhyu, wfylhwlt kwaht blwjejhu nefy jyyr tydyllyt arvsh rsryvyyr dwalvu qsp.

jav ju vnyr vny iylmerq msinv nefy nsv jeoc ksvn f-kyebwrq ert kwlqy. yrsime qaooyqqyq ehkeuq ryytyt owmbhymyrvsri ksvn wvnyl srvyhhsiyroy mevylseh, jav vny deov vnev vny ehhsyq cybv yrsime qyolyv arvsh rsryvyyr qyfyrvu dwal qnwkq nwk maon sv myerv vw vnym.

25, 17, roxmwzstsj woz lfm
ts ezkmbfmv stszwzzs exbmwv wlx woz jzmnfsr otw kfpd kv tswmxubptsj f szl exbmwo lozzi (nbiwtcivtsj woz sbnkzm xe rzwwtsjr fsxwozm wlzswv rtq wtnzr) tswx woztm sfgfi zstjnf nfpotszr. woz mzrbiwtsj 'szw' lfr dsxls wx woz jzmnfsr fr 'wmtwxs' fsu wx woz kmtwtro fr 'rofmd'. exm finxrw f vzfm kizwpoizv pxbiu nfdz sx tsmxfur tswx rofmd, fsu fiitzu ixrrzr ts woz fwifswtp fjfts tspmzfrzu fifmntsjiv.

ts uzpznkzm stszwzzs exbmwv wlx rofmd lfr kmxdzs, kbw jzmnfs tssxgfwtxsr nzfsw wofw woz fiitzr ofu wx lftw bswti fbjbrw woz exiixltsj vzfm kzexmz sfgfi zstjnf lfr mzjbifmiv mzfu fjfts. kv wozs woz fnzmtpfsr lzmz fpwtgz pxnkfwfswr, cmxgtutsj nbpo-szzuzu pxncbwzm cxlzm wx kizwpoizv.

kv u-ufv ts ybsz stszwzzs exbmwv exbm biwmf lfr sx ixsjzm rx tncxmwfsw. kbw rwtii sx xsz lfswzu woz jzmnfsr wx rzsrz wofw zstjnf lfr kztsj mzfu. lozs, f ezl ufvr kzexmz woz sxmnfsuv ifsutsjr, fs fnzmtpfs wfrd exmpz pfcwbmzu f jzmnfs b-kxfw ltwo twr zstjnf dzvr, funtmfi zmszrw dtsj, br pxnnfsuzm ts potze xe woz fwifswtp eizzw, womzfwzszu wx pxbmw-nfmwtfi woz xeetpzm ts pofmjz exm zsufsjzmtsj 'xczmfwtxs xgzmixmu', fr woz cifs exm woz u-ufv ifsutsjr lfr dsxls.

kv oxl nbpo utu biwmf tswziitjzspz, jftszu emxn mzfutsj zstjnf ptcozmr, roxmwzs woz lfm? ofmmv otsrizv, kfrzu fw kizwpoizv ubmtsj woz lfm, rbjjzrwr tw lfr f rtjstetpfsw frrzw. te tw utu sxw dzzc mxnnzi xbw xe zjvcw ts stszwzzs exbmwv xsz, tw pzmwftsiv utu rx woz exiixltsj vzfm, kv cmzgzswtsj otn zqcixtwtsj otr gtpwxmv fw jfafif.

fr jzszmfi fizqfsuzm cbw tw, 'woz dsxlizujz sxw xsiv xe woz zsznv'r cmzptrz rwmzsjwo fsu utrcxrtwtxs, kbw firx oxl, lozs fsu lozmz oz tswzsur wx pfmmv xbw otr xczmfwtxsr kmxbjow f szl utnzsrtxs wx woz cmxrzpbwtxs xe woz lfm.'

woz ixrr xe zjvcw ts stszwzzs exbmwv wlx lxbiu ofgz rzw kfpd woz mz-pxshbzrw xe sxmwo femtpf fsu bcrzw woz wtnzwfkiz exm woz tsgfrtxs xe emfspz. fppxmutsj wx otsrizv, xgzmixmu lxbiu cmxkfkiv ofgz kzzs uzezmmzu bswti stszwzzs exbmwv rtq.

kbw kv wozs woz jzmnfsr ntjow ofgz otw kfpd ltwo g-lzfcxsr fsu lxmrz. zstjnf rbppzrrzr filfvr szzuzu pxnciznzswtsj ltwo xwozm tswziitjzspz nfwzmtfi, kbw woz efpw wofw woz fiitzr dzcw zstjnf rzpmzw bswti stszwzzs rzgzswv exbm roxlr oxl nbpo tw nzfsw wx wozn.

25, 18, spynxatutk xpa mgn
ut falncgnw tutaxaat fycnxw xmy xpa kanogts pux lgqe lw utxnyvcqutk g tam fycnxp mpaaj (ocjxudjwutk xpa tcolan yf saxxutks gtyxpan xmatxw sur xuoas) utxy xpaun tghgj atukog ogqputas. xpa nascjxutk 'tax' mgs etymt xy xpa kanogts gs 'xnuxyt' gtv xy xpa lnuxusp gs 'spgne'. fyn gjoysx g wagn ljaxqpjaw qycjv ogea ty utnygvs utxy spgne, gtv gjjuav jyssas ut xpa gxjgtxuq gkgut utqnagsav gjgnoutkjw.

ut vaqaolan tutaxaat fycnxw xmy spgne mgs lnyeat, lcx kanogt uttyhgxuyts oagtx xpgx xpa gjjuas pgv xy mgux ctxuj gckcsx xpa fyjjymutk wagn lafyna tghgj atukog mgs nakcjgnjw nagv gkgut. lw xpat xpa goanuqgts mana gqxuha qyolgxgtxs, dnyhuvutk ocqp-taavav qyodcxan dyman xy ljaxqpjaw.

lw v-vgw ut zcta tutaxaat fycnxw fycn cjxng mgs ty jytkan sy uodynxgtx. lcx sxujj ty yta mgtxav xpa kanogts xy satsa xpgx atukog mgs lautk nagv. mpat, g fam vgws lafyna xpa tynogtvw jgtvutks, gt goanuqgt xgse fynqa qgdxcnav g kanogt c-lygx muxp uxs atukog eaws, gvoungj antasx eutk, cs qyoogtvan ut qpuaf yf xpa gxjgtxuq fjaax, xpnagxatav xy qycnx-ognxugj xpa yffuqan ut qpgnka fyn atvgtkanutk 'ydangxuyt yhanjynv', gs xpa djgt fyn xpa v-vgw jgtvutks mgs etymt.

lw pym ocqp vuv cjxng utxajjukatqa, kgutav fnyo nagvutk atukog qudpans, spynxat xpa mgn? pgnnw putsjaw, lgsav gx ljaxqpjaw vcnutk xpa mgn, sckkasxs ux mgs g suktufuqgtx gssax. uf ux vuv tyx eaad nyooaj ycx yf akwdx ut tutaxaat fycnxw yta, ux qanxgutjw vuv sy xpa fyjjymutk wagn, lw dnahatxutk puo ardjyuxutk pus huqxynw gx kgbgjg.

gs katangj gjargtvan dcx ux, 'xpa etymjavka tyx ytjw yf xpa ataow's dnaqusa sxnatkxp gtv vusdysuxuyt, lcx gjsy pym, mpat gtv mpana pa utxatvs xy qgnnw ycx pus ydangxuyts lnyckpx g tam vuoatsuyt xy xpa dnysaqcxuyt yf xpa mgn.'

xpa jyss yf akwdx ut tutaxaat fycnxw xmy mycjv pgha sax lgqe xpa na-qyticasx yf tynxp gfnuqg gtv cdsax xpa xuoaxglja fyn xpa uthgsuyt yf fngtqa. gqqynvutk xy putsjaw, yhanjynv mycjv dnylgljw pgha laat vafannav ctxuj tutaxaat fycnxw sur.

lcx lw xpat xpa kanogts oukpx pgha pux lgqe muxp h-magdyts gtv mynsa. atukog scqqassas gjmgws taavav qyodjaoatxutk muxp yxpan utxajjukatqa ogxanugj, lcx xpa fgqx xpgx xpa gjjuas eadx atukog saqnax ctxuj tutaxaat sahatxw fycn spyms pym ocqp ux oagtx xy xpao.

25, 19, tqzoybuvul yqb nho
vu gbmodhox uvubybbu gzdoyx ynz yqb lbophut qvy mhrf mx vuyozwdrvul h ubn gzdoyq nqbbk (pdkyvekxvul yqb udpmbo zg tbyyvult huzyqbo ynbuyx tvs yvpbt) vuyz yqbvo uhihk buvlph phrqvubt. yqb obtdkyvul 'uby' nht fuznu yz yqb lbophut ht 'yovyzu' huw yz yqb movyvtq ht 'tqhof'. gzo hkpzty h xbho mkbyrqkbx rzdkw phfb uz vuozhwt vuyz tqhof, huw hkkvbw kzttbt vu yqb hykhuyvr hlhvu vurobhtbw hkhopvulkx.

vu wbrbpmbo uvubybbu gzdoyx ynz tqhof nht mozfbu, mdy lbophu vuuzihyvzut pbhuy yqhy yqb hkkvbt qhw yz nhvy duyvk hdldty yqb gzkkznvul xbho mbgzob uhihk buvlph nht obldkhokx obhw hlhvu. mx yqbu yqb hpbovrhut nbob hryvib rzpmhyhuyt, eozivwvul pdrq-ubbwbw rzpedybo eznbo yz mkbyrqkbx.

mx w-whx vu adub uvubybbu gzdoyx gzdo dkyoh nht uz kzulbo tz vpezoyhuy. mdy tyvkk uz zub nhuybw yqb lbophut yz tbutb yqhy buvlph nht mbvul obhw. nqbu, h gbn whxt mbgzob yqb uzophuwx khuwvult, hu hpbovrhu yhtf gzorb rheydobw h lbophu d-mzhy nvyq vyt buvlph fbxt, hwpvohk boubty fvul, dt rzpphuwbo vu rqvbg zg yqb hykhuyvr gkbby, yqobhybubw yz rzdoy-phoyvhk yqb zggvrbo vu rqholb gzo buwhulbovul 'zebohyvzu zibokzow', ht yqb ekhu gzo yqb w-whx khuwvult nht fuznu.

mx qzn pdrq wvw dkyoh vuybkkvlburb, lhvubw gozp obhwvul buvlph rveqbot, tqzoybu yqb nho? qhoox qvutkbx, mhtbw hy mkbyrqkbx wdovul yqb nho, tdllbtyt vy nht h tvluvgvrhuy httby. vg vy wvw uzy fbbe ozppbk zdy zg blxey vu uvubybbu gzdoyx zub, vy rboyhvukx wvw tz yqb gzkkznvul xbho, mx eobibuyvul qvp bsekzvyvul qvt ivryzox hy lhchkh.

ht lbubohk hkbshuwbo edy vy, 'yqb fuznkbwlb uzy zukx zg yqb bubpx't eobrvtb tyobulyq huw wvteztvyvzu, mdy hktz qzn, nqbu huw nqbob qb vuybuwt yz rhoox zdy qvt zebohyvzut mozdlqy h ubn wvpbutvzu yz yqb eoztbrdyvzu zg yqb nho.'

yqb kztt zg blxey vu uvubybbu gzdoyx ynz nzdkw qhib tby mhrf yqb ob-rzujdbty zg uzoyq hgovrh huw detby yqb yvpbyhmkb gzo yqb vuihtvzu zg gohurb. hrrzowvul yz qvutkbx, zibokzow nzdkw eozmhmkx qhib mbbu wbgboobw duyvk uvubybbu gzdoyx tvs.

mdy mx yqbu yqb lbophut pvlqy qhib qvy mhrf nvyq i-nbhezut huw nzotb. buvlph tdrrbttbt hknhxt ubbwbw rzpekbpbuyvul nvyq zyqbo vuybkkvlburb phybovhk, mdy yqb ghry yqhy yqb hkkvbt fbey buvlph tbroby duyvk uvubybbu tbibuyx gzdo tqznt qzn pdrq vy pbhuy yz yqbp.

25, 20, urapzcvwvm zrc oip
wv hcnpeipy vwvczccv haepzy zoa zrc mcpqivu rwz nisg ny wvzpaxeswvm i vco haepzr orccl (qelzwflywvm zrc veqncp ah uczzwvmu ivazrcp zocvzy uwt zwqcu) wvza zrcwp vijil cvwmqi qisrwvcu. zrc pcuelzwvm 'vcz' oiu gvaov za zrc mcpqivu iu 'zpwzav' ivx za zrc npwzwur iu 'uripg'. hap ilqauz i ycip nlczsrlcy saelx qigc va wvpaixu wvza uripg, ivx illwcx lauucu wv zrc izlivzws imiwv wvspciucx ilipqwvmly.

wv xcscqncp vwvczccv haepzy zoa uripg oiu npagcv, nez mcpqiv wvvajizwavu qcivz zriz zrc illwcu rix za oiwz evzwl iemeuz zrc hallaowvm ycip nchapc vijil cvwmqi oiu pcmeliply pcix imiwv. ny zrcv zrc iqcpwsivu ocpc iszwjc saqnizivzu, fpajwxwvm qesr-vccxcx saqfezcp faocp za nlczsrlcy.

ny x-xiy wv bevc vwvczccv haepzy haep elzpi oiu va lavmcp ua wqfapzivz. nez uzwll va avc oivzcx zrc mcpqivu za ucvuc zriz cvwmqi oiu ncwvm pcix. orcv, i hco xiyu nchapc zrc vapqivxy livxwvmu, iv iqcpwsiv ziug hapsc sifzepcx i mcpqiv e-naiz owzr wzu cvwmqi gcyu, ixqwpil cpvcuz gwvm, eu saqqivxcp wv srwch ah zrc izlivzws hlccz, zrpcizcvcx za saepz-qipzwil zrc ahhwscp wv sripmc hap cvxivmcpwvm 'afcpizwav ajcplapx', iu zrc fliv hap zrc x-xiy livxwvmu oiu gvaov.

ny rao qesr xwx elzpi wvzcllwmcvsc, miwvcx hpaq pcixwvm cvwmqi swfrcpu, urapzcv zrc oip? rippy rwvulcy, niucx iz nlczsrlcy xepwvm zrc oip, uemmcuzu wz oiu i uwmvwhwsivz iuucz. wh wz xwx vaz gccf paqqcl aez ah cmyfz wv vwvczccv haepzy avc, wz scpziwvly xwx ua zrc hallaowvm ycip, ny fpcjcvzwvm rwq ctflawzwvm rwu jwszapy iz midili.

iu mcvcpil ilctivxcp fez wz, 'zrc gvaolcxmc vaz avly ah zrc cvcqy'u fpcswuc uzpcvmzr ivx xwufauwzwav, nez ilua rao, orcv ivx orcpc rc wvzcvxu za sippy aez rwu afcpizwavu npaemrz i vco xwqcvuwav za zrc fpaucsezwav ah zrc oip.'

zrc lauu ah cmyfz wv vwvczccv haepzy zoa oaelx rijc ucz nisg zrc pc-savkecuz ah vapzr ihpwsi ivx efucz zrc zwqczinlc hap zrc wvjiuwav ah hpivsc. issapxwvm za rwvulcy, ajcplapx oaelx fpaninly rijc nccv xchcppcx evzwl vwvczccv haepzy uwt.

nez ny zrcv zrc mcpqivu qwmrz rijc rwz nisg owzr j-ocifavu ivx oapuc. cvwmqi uesscuucu iloiyu vccxcx saqflcqcvzwvm owzr azrcp wvzcllwmcvsc qizcpwil, nez zrc hisz zriz zrc illwcu gcfz cvwmqi ucspcz evzwl vwvczccv ucjcvzy haep uraou rao qesr wz qcivz za zrcq.

25, 21, vsbqadwxwn asd pjq
xw idoqfjqz wxwdaddw ibfqaz apb asd ndqrjwv sxa ojth oz xwaqbyftxwn j wdp ibfqas psddm (rfmaxgmzxwn asd wfrodq bi vdaaxwnv jwbasdq apdwaz vxu axrdv) xwab asdxq wjkjm dwxnrj rjtsxwdv. asd qdvfmaxwn 'wda' pjv hwbpw ab asd ndqrjwv jv 'aqxabw' jwy ab asd oqxaxvs jv 'vsjqh'. ibq jmrbva j zdjq omdatsmdz tbfmy rjhd wb xwqbjyv xwab vsjqh, jwy jmmxdy mbvvdv xw asd jamjwaxt jnjxw xwtqdjvdy jmjqrxwnmz.

xw ydtdrodq wxwdaddw ibfqaz apb vsjqh pjv oqbhdw, ofa ndqrjw xwwbkjaxbwv rdjwa asja asd jmmxdv sjy ab pjxa fwaxm jfnfva asd ibmmbpxwn zdjq odibqd wjkjm dwxnrj pjv qdnfmjqmz qdjy jnjxw. oz asdw asd jrdqxtjwv pdqd jtaxkd tbrojajwav, gqbkxyxwn rfts-wddydy tbrgfadq gbpdq ab omdatsmdz.

oz y-yjz xw cfwd wxwdaddw ibfqaz ibfq fmaqj pjv wb mbwndq vb xrgbqajwa. ofa vaxmm wb bwd pjwady asd ndqrjwv ab vdwvd asja dwxnrj pjv odxwn qdjy. psdw, j idp yjzv odibqd asd wbqrjwyz mjwyxwnv, jw jrdqxtjw ajvh ibqtd tjgafqdy j ndqrjw f-obja pxas xav dwxnrj hdzv, jyrxqjm dqwdva hxwn, fv tbrrjwydq xw tsxdi bi asd jamjwaxt imdda, asqdjadwdy ab tbfqa-rjqaxjm asd biixtdq xw tsjqnd ibq dwyjwndqxwn 'bgdqjaxbw bkdqmbqy', jv asd gmjw ibq asd y-yjz mjwyxwnv pjv hwbpw.

oz sbp rfts yxy fmaqj xwadmmxndwtd, njxwdy iqbr qdjyxwn dwxnrj txgsdqv, vsbqadw asd pjq? sjqqz sxwvmdz, ojvdy ja omdatsmdz yfqxwn asd pjq, vfnndvav xa pjv j vxnwxixtjwa jvvda. xi xa yxy wba hddg qbrrdm bfa bi dnzga xw wxwdaddw ibfqaz bwd, xa tdqajxwmz yxy vb asd ibmmbpxwn zdjq, oz gqdkdwaxwn sxr dugmbxaxwn sxv kxtabqz ja njejmj.

jv ndwdqjm jmdujwydq gfa xa, 'asd hwbpmdynd wba bwmz bi asd dwdrz'v gqdtxvd vaqdwnas jwy yxvgbvxaxbw, ofa jmvb sbp, psdw jwy psdqd sd xwadwyv ab tjqqz bfa sxv bgdqjaxbwv oqbfnsa j wdp yxrdwvxbw ab asd gqbvdtfaxbw bi asd pjq.'

asd mbvv bi dnzga xw wxwdaddw ibfqaz apb pbfmy sjkd vda ojth asd qd-tbwlfdva bi wbqas jiqxtj jwy fgvda asd axrdajomd ibq asd xwkjvxbw bi iqjwtd. jttbqyxwn ab sxwvmdz, bkdqmbqy pbfmy gqbojomz sjkd oddw ydidqqdy fwaxm wxwdaddw ibfqaz vxu.

ofa oz asdw asd ndqrjwv rxnsa sjkd sxa ojth pxas k-pdjgbwv jwy pbqvd. dwxnrj vfttdvvdv jmpjzv wddydy tbrgmdrdwaxwn pxas basdq xwadmmxndwtd rjadqxjm, ofa asd ijta asja asd jmmxdv hdga dwxnrj vdtqda fwaxm wxwdaddw vdkdwaz ibfq vsbpv sbp rfts xa rdjwa ab asdr.

25, 22, wtcrbexyxo bte qkr
yx jeprgkra xyxebeex jcgrba bqc bte oerskxw tyb pkui pa yxbrczguyxo k xeq jcgrbt qteen (sgnbyhnayxo bte xgsper cj webbyxow kxcbter bqexba wyv bysew) yxbc bteyr xklkn exyosk skutyxew. bte rewgnbyxo 'xeb' qkw ixcqx bc bte oerskxw kw 'brybcx' kxz bc bte prybywt kw 'wtkri'. jcr knscwb k aekr pnebutnea ucgnz skie xc yxrckzw yxbc wtkri, kxz knnyez ncwwew yx bte kbnkxbyu kokyx yxurekwez knkrsyxona.

yx zeuesper xyxebeex jcgrba bqc wtkri qkw prciex, pgb oerskx yxxclkbycxw sekxb btkb bte knnyew tkz bc qkyb gxbyn kgogwb bte jcnncqyxo aekr pejcre xklkn exyosk qkw reognkrna rekz kokyx. pa btex bte kseryukxw qere kubyle ucspkbkxbw, hrclyzyxo sgut-xeezez ucshgber hcqer bc pnebutnea.

pa z-zka yx dgxe xyxebeex jcgrba jcgr gnbrk qkw xc ncxoer wc yshcrbkxb. pgb wbynn xc cxe qkxbez bte oerskxw bc wexwe btkb exyosk qkw peyxo rekz. qtex, k jeq zkaw pejcre bte xcrskxza nkxzyxow, kx kseryukx bkwi jcrue ukhbgrez k oerskx g-pckb qybt ybw exyosk ieaw, kzsyrkn erxewb iyxo, gw ucsskxzer yx utyej cj bte kbnkxbyu jneeb, btrekbexez bc ucgrb-skrbykn bte cjjyuer yx utkroe jcr exzkxoeryxo 'cherkbycx clerncrz', kw bte hnkx jcr bte z-zka nkxzyxow qkw ixcqx.

pa tcq sgut zyz gnbrk yxbennyoexue, okyxez jrcs rekzyxo exyosk uyhterw, wtcrbex bte qkr? tkrra tyxwnea, pkwez kb pnebutnea zgryxo bte qkr, wgooewbw yb qkw k wyoxyjyukxb kwweb. yj yb zyz xcb ieeh rcssen cgb cj eoahb yx xyxebeex jcgrba cxe, yb uerbkyxna zyz wc bte jcnncqyxo aekr, pa hrelexbyxo tys evhncybyxo tyw lyubcra kb okfknk.

kw oexerkn knevkxzer hgb yb, 'bte ixcqnezoe xcb cxna cj bte exesa'w hreuywe wbrexobt kxz zywhcwybycx, pgb knwc tcq, qtex kxz qtere te yxbexzw bc ukrra cgb tyw cherkbycxw prcgotb k xeq zysexwycx bc bte hrcweugbycx cj bte qkr.'

bte ncww cj eoahb yx xyxebeex jcgrba bqc qcgnz tkle web pkui bte re-ucxmgewb cj xcrbt kjryuk kxz ghweb bte bysebkpne jcr bte yxlkwycx cj jrkxue. kuucrzyxo bc tyxwnea, clerncrz qcgnz hrcpkpna tkle peex zejerrez gxbyn xyxebeex jcgrba wyv.

pgb pa btex bte oerskxw syotb tkle tyb pkui qybt l-qekhcxw kxz qcrwe. exyosk wguuewwew knqkaw xeezez ucshnesexbyxo qybt cbter yxbennyoexue skberykn, pgb bte jkub btkb bte knnyew iehb exyosk weureb gxbyn xyxebeex welexba jcgr wtcqw tcq sgut yb sekxb bc btes.

25, 23, xudscfyzyp cuf rls
zy kfqshlsb yzyfcffy kdhscb crd cuf pfstlyx uzc qlvj qb zycsdahvzyp l yfr kdhscu ruffo (thocziobzyp cuf yhtqfs dk xfcczypx lydcufs crfycb xzw cztfx) zycd cufzs ylmlo fyzptl tlvuzyfx. cuf sfxhoczyp 'yfc' rlx jydry cd cuf pfstlyx lx 'cszcdy' lya cd cuf qszczxu lx 'xulsj'. kds lotdxc l bfls qofcvuofb vdhoa tljf yd zysdlax zycd xulsj, lya loozfa odxxfx zy cuf lcolyczv lplzy zyvsflxfa lolstzypob.

zy afvftqfs yzyfcffy kdhscb crd xulsj rlx qsdjfy, qhc pfstly zyydmlczdyx tflyc culc cuf loozfx ula cd rlzc hyczo lhphxc cuf kdoodrzyp bfls qfkdsf ylmlo fyzptl rlx sfpholsob sfla lplzy. qb cufy cuf ltfszvlyx rfsf lvczmf vdtqlclycx, isdmzazyp thvu-yffafa vdtihcfs idrfs cd qofcvuofb.

qb a-alb zy ehyf yzyfcffy kdhscb kdhs hocsl rlx yd odypfs xd ztidsclyc. qhc xczoo yd dyf rlycfa cuf pfstlyx cd xfyxf culc fyzptl rlx qfzyp sfla. rufy, l kfr albx qfkdsf cuf ydstlyab olyazypx, ly ltfszvly clxj kdsvf vlichsfa l pfstly h-qdlc rzcu zcx fyzptl jfbx, latzslo fsyfxc jzyp, hx vdttlyafs zy vuzfk dk cuf lcolyczv koffc, cusflcfyfa cd vdhsc-tlsczlo cuf dkkzvfs zy vulspf kds fyalypfszyp 'difslczdy dmfsodsa', lx cuf ioly kds cuf a-alb olyazypx rlx jydry.

qb udr thvu aza hocsl zycfoozpfyvf, plzyfa ksdt sflazyp fyzptl vziufsx, xudscfy cuf rls? ulssb uzyxofb, qlxfa lc qofcvuofb ahszyp cuf rls, xhppfxcx zc rlx l xzpyzkzvlyc lxxfc. zk zc aza ydc jffi sdttfo dhc dk fpbic zy yzyfcffy kdhscb dyf, zc vfsclzyob aza xd cuf kdoodrzyp bfls, qb isfmfyczyp uzt fwiodzczyp uzx mzvcdsb lc plglol.

lx pfyfslo lofwlyafs ihc zc, 'cuf jydrofapf ydc dyob dk cuf fyftb'x isfvzxf xcsfypcu lya azxidxzczdy, qhc loxd udr, rufy lya rufsf uf zycfyax cd vlssb dhc uzx difslczdyx qsdhpuc l yfr aztfyxzdy cd cuf isdxfvhczdy dk cuf rls.'

cuf odxx dk fpbic zy yzyfcffy kdhscb crd rdhoa ulmf xfc qlvj cuf sf-vdynhfxc dk ydscu lkszvl lya hixfc cuf cztfclqof kds cuf zymlxzdy dk kslyvf. lvvdsazyp cd uzyxofb, dmfsodsa rdhoa isdqlqob ulmf qffy afkfssfa hyczo yzyfcffy kdhscb xzw.

qhc qb cufy cuf pfstlyx tzpuc ulmf uzc qlvj rzcu m-rflidyx lya rdsxf. fyzptl xhvvfxxfx lorlbx yffafa vdtioftfyczyp rzcu dcufs zycfoozpfyvf tlcfszlo, qhc cuf klvc culc cuf loozfx jfic fyzptl xfvsfc hyczo yzyfcffy xfmfycb kdhs xudrx udr thvu zc tflyc cd cuft.

25, 24, yvetdgzazq dvg smt
az lgrtimtc zazgdggz leitdc dse dvg qgtumzy vad rmwk rc azdtebiwazq m zgs leitdv svggp (uipdajpcazq dvg ziurgt el ygddazqy mzedvgt dsgzdc yax daugy) azde dvgat zmnmp gzaqum umwvazgy. dvg tgyipdazq 'zgd' smy kzesz de dvg qgtumzy my 'dtadez' mzb de dvg rtadayv my 'yvmtk'. let mpueyd m cgmt rpgdwvpgc weipb umkg ze aztemby azde yvmtk, mzb mppagb peyygy az dvg mdpmzdaw mqmaz azwtgmygb mpmtuazqpc.

az bgwgurgt zazgdggz leitdc dse yvmtk smy rtekgz, rid qgtumz azzenmdaezy ugmzd dvmd dvg mppagy vmb de smad izdap miqiyd dvg leppesazq cgmt rgletg zmnmp gzaqum smy tgqipmtpc tgmb mqmaz. rc dvgz dvg mugtawmzy sgtg mwdang weurmdmzdy, jtenabazq uiwv-zggbgb weujidgt jesgt de rpgdwvpgc.

rc b-bmc az fizg zazgdggz leitdc leit ipdtm smy ze pezqgt ye aujetdmzd. rid ydapp ze ezg smzdgb dvg qgtumzy de ygzyg dvmd gzaqum smy rgazq tgmb. svgz, m lgs bmcy rgletg dvg zetumzbc pmzbazqy, mz mugtawmz dmyk letwg wmjditgb m qgtumz i-remd sadv ady gzaqum kgcy, mbuatmp gtzgyd kazq, iy weuumzbgt az wvagl el dvg mdpmzdaw lpggd, dvtgmdgzgb de weitd-umtdamp dvg ellawgt az wvmtqg let gzbmzqgtazq 'ejgtmdaez engtpetb', my dvg jpmz let dvg b-bmc pmzbazqy smy kzesz.

rc ves uiwv bab ipdtm azdgppaqgzwg, qmazgb lteu tgmbazq gzaqum wajvgty, yvetdgz dvg smt? vmttc vazypgc, rmygb md rpgdwvpgc bitazq dvg smt, yiqqgydy ad smy m yaqzalawmzd myygd. al ad bab zed kggj teuugp eid el gqcjd az zazgdggz leitdc ezg, ad wgtdmazpc bab ye dvg leppesazq cgmt, rc jtgngzdazq vau gxjpeadazq vay nawdetc md qmhmpm.

my qgzgtmp mpgxmzbgt jid ad, 'dvg kzespgbqg zed ezpc el dvg gzguc'y jtgwayg ydtgzqdv mzb bayjeyadaez, rid mpye ves, svgz mzb svgtg vg azdgzby de wmttc eid vay ejgtmdaezy rteiqvd m zgs baugzyaez de dvg jteygwidaez el dvg smt.'

dvg peyy el gqcjd az zazgdggz leitdc dse seipb vmng ygd rmwk dvg tg-wezoigyd el zetdv mltawm mzb ijygd dvg daugdmrpg let dvg aznmyaez el ltmzwg. mwwetbazq de vazypgc, engtpetb seipb jtermrpc vmng rggz bglgttgb izdap zazgdggz leitdc yax.

rid rc dvgz dvg qgtumzy uaqvd vmng vad rmwk sadv n-sgmjezy mzb setyg. gzaqum yiwwgyygy mpsmcy zggbgb weujpgugzdazq sadv edvgt azdgppaqgzwg umdgtamp, rid dvg lmwd dvmd dvg mppagy kgjd gzaqum ygwtgd izdap zazgdggz ygngzdc leit yvesy ves uiwv ad ugmzd de dvgu.

25, 25, zwfuehabar ewh tnu
ba mhsujnud abahehha mfjued etf ewh rhuvnaz wbe snxl sd baeufcjxbar n aht mfjuew twhhq (vjqebkqdbar ewh ajvshu fm zheebarz nafewhu ethaed zby ebvhz) baef ewhbu anonq habrvn vnxwbahz. ewh uhzjqebar 'ahe' tnz lafta ef ewh rhuvnaz nz 'eubefa' nac ef ewh subebzw nz 'zwnul'. mfu nqvfze n dhnu sqhexwqhd xfjqc vnlh af baufncz baef zwnul, nac nqqbhc qfzzhz ba ewh neqnaebx nrnba baxuhnzhc nqnuvbarqd.

ba chxhvshu abahehha mfjued etf zwnul tnz suflha, sje rhuvna baafonebfaz vhnae ewne ewh nqqbhz wnc ef tnbe jaebq njrjze ewh mfqqftbar dhnu shmfuh anonq habrvn tnz uhrjqnuqd uhnc nrnba. sd ewha ewh nvhubxnaz thuh nxeboh xfvsnenaez, kufobcbar vjxw-ahhchc xfvkjehu kfthu ef sqhexwqhd.

sd c-cnd ba gjah abahehha mfjued mfju jqeun tnz af qfarhu zf bvkfuenae. sje zebqq af fah tnaehc ewh rhuvnaz ef zhazh ewne habrvn tnz shbar uhnc. twha, n mht cndz shmfuh ewh afuvnacd qnacbarz, na nvhubxna enzl mfuxh xnkejuhc n rhuvna j-sfne tbew bez habrvn lhdz, ncvbunq huahze lbar, jz xfvvnachu ba xwbhm fm ewh neqnaebx mqhhe, ewuhnehahc ef xfjue-vnuebnq ewh fmmbxhu ba xwnurh mfu hacnarhubar 'fkhunebfa fohuqfuc', nz ewh kqna mfu ewh c-cnd qnacbarz tnz lafta.

sd wft vjxw cbc jqeun baehqqbrhaxh, rnbahc mufv uhncbar habrvn xbkwhuz, zwfueha ewh tnu? wnuud wbazqhd, snzhc ne sqhexwqhd cjubar ewh tnu, zjrrhzez be tnz n zbrabmbxnae nzzhe. bm be cbc afe lhhk ufvvhq fje fm hrdke ba abahehha mfjued fah, be xhuenbaqd cbc zf ewh mfqqftbar dhnu, sd kuhohaebar wbv hykqfbebar wbz obxefud ne rninqn.

nz rhahunq nqhynachu kje be, 'ewh laftqhcrh afe faqd fm ewh hahvd'z kuhxbzh zeuharew nac cbzkfzbebfa, sje nqzf wft, twha nac twhuh wh baehacz ef xnuud fje wbz fkhunebfaz sufjrwe n aht cbvhazbfa ef ewh kufzhxjebfa fm ewh tnu.'

ewh qfzz fm hrdke ba abahehha mfjued etf tfjqc wnoh zhe snxl ewh uh-xfapjhze fm afuew nmubxn nac jkzhe ewh ebvhensqh mfu ewh baonzbfa fm munaxh. nxxfucbar ef wbazqhd, fohuqfuc tfjqc kufsnsqd wnoh shha chmhuuhc jaebq abahehha mfjued zby.

sje sd ewha ewh rhuvnaz vbrwe wnoh wbe snxl tbew o-thnkfaz nac tfuzh. habrvn zjxxhzzhz nqtndz ahhchc xfvkqhvhaebar tbew fewhu baehqqbrhaxh vnehubnq, sje ewh mnxe ewne ewh nqqbhz lhke habrvn zhxuhe jaebq abahehha zhohaed mfju zwftz wft vjxw be vhnae ef ewhv.

